<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec51">V. Respiratory Effects</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Inhaled anesthetics produce dose-dependent respiratory depression with a decrease in tidal volume that is completely compensated for by an increase in respiratory rate. The increase in arterial carbon dioxide partial pressure as a result of respiratory depression is somewhat offset by the stimulation of the attendant surgical procedure. All of the inhaled anesthetics produce a dose-dependent depression of the ventilatory response to hypercarbia and the chemoreceptor response to hypoxia, even at subanesthetic concentrations (as low as 0.1 MAC).</p>
<p class="indent">Inhalation of the volatile anesthetics (especially isoflurane and desflurane) during induction of anesthesia can produce airway irritation and may precipitate coughing, laryngospasm, or bronchospasm. This is more likely in patients who smoke or have asthma. At surgical levels of anesthesia, equipotent doses of inhaled anesthetics produce some bronchodilation, mediated through blocking voltage-gated calcium channels in airway smooth muscle, thereby decreasing the calcium stores in the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Desflurane is the exception, in that it produces mild bronchoconstriction. Desflurane has higher pungency than other anesthetics and is not suitable for induction of anesthesia by inhalation of gas alone. Sevoflurane is the preferred agent for an inhaled induction both in children and adults. All of the inhaled anesthetics inhibit hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction in animals, producing an intrapulmonary shunt, but their effects in humans during one lung ventilation may be less severe (<strong><a href="ch008-sec06.xhtml#ff8-5">Figures 8.5</a></strong> and <strong><a href="ch008-sec06.xhtml#ff8-6">8.6</a></strong>).</p>
<p class="indent">Following anesthesia with nitrous oxide, if the nitrous oxide is abruptly discontinued and the patient is allowed to breathe room air, there is a risk of transient <strong><em>diffusion hypoxia.</em></strong> A large volume of nitrous oxide diffuses from mixed venous blood into the alveoli. But simultaneously, the large volume of nitrogen being inhaled is not absorbed as quickly into the blood because it is so much less soluble than nitrous oxide. Consequently, the concentration of oxygen in the lung is reduced. This effect is short lived (2-3 minutes), and hypoxia can easily be avoided by having the patient breathe 100% oxygen when discontinuing nitrous oxide.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>