<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/jquery.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
<!--<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-1.10.2.min.js'></script>-->
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-migrate-1.2.1.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery.qtip.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/etext.js'></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec55"><a id="page162"></a>IX. Clinical Use of Inhaled Anesthetics</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Due to a lack of pungency and a low blood:gas partition coefficient, sevoflurane is the agent of choice for an inhaled induction of anesthesia in both children and adults, such as when intravenous access is not possible or desirable. Inhaled anesthetics remain the most popular drugs for maintenance of anesthesia during surgery as they are easy to administer and the dose can be easily titrated in response to highly variable surgical stimuli. Despite their popularity, inhaled anesthetics have some significant drawbacks. These can include profound respiratory depression, hypotension, lack of analgesia at low concentrations, PONV, the potential for triggering malignant hyperthermia in susceptible individuals, and rare toxicity such as hepatitis. The volatile anesthetics also interfere with monitoring of sensory-evoked potentials when administered in doses of more than 0.5 MAC. Nevertheless, despite these drawbacks, when inhaled anesthetics are administered for surgical procedures by appropriately trained specialists, the morbidity and mortality from general anesthesia are remarkably low.</p>
<p class="indent">All inhaled anesthetics including nitrous oxide and xenon contribute to postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV). General anesthesia increases the risk of PONV significantly when compared to regional anesthetic techniques. The incidence of PONV is between 25% to 30% following surgery when general anesthesia is maintained using inhalational agents along with narcotics. However, when propofol is substituted for inhalational agents, the relative risk of PONV is reduced to 19%. Using air as a carrier gas in place of nitrous oxide reduces the relative risk by 12%.</p>
<p class="indent">In surgical patients, postoperative immunocompromise is primarily related to the neuroendocrine stress response to surgery, secondary to the activation of the autonomic nervous system and the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. The literature concerning the immunomodulatory effects of inhalational anesthetics is somewhat contradictory, but the majority of data suggest that these agents may have immunosuppressive properties. Inhalational anesthetics reduce the production of radical oxygen species (ROS) from neutrophils, which may result in decreased potency in killing bacteria.</p>
<p class="BIBLIOGRAPHYpTitle">Suggested Readings</p>
<ol class="ref"><li id="bib1">Becker DE, Rosenberg M. Nitrous oxide and the inhalation anesthetics. <em>Anesth Prog</em>. 2008;55(4):124-132. PMID: 19108597.</li>
<li id="bib2">Derwall M, Coburn M, Rex S, et al. Xenon: recent developments and future perspectives. <em>Minerva Anestesiol</em>. 2009;75(1-2):37-45. PMID: 18475253.</li>
<li id="bib3">de Vasconcellos K, Sneyd JR. Nitrous oxide: are we still in equipoise? A qualitative review of current controversies. <em>Br J Anaesth</em>. 2013;111(6):877-885 PMID: 23801743.</li>
<li id="bib4">Eger II EI. The pharmacology of isoflurane. <em>Br J Anaesth</em>. 1984;56(suppl 1):71S-99S. PMID: 6391530.</li>
<li id="bib5">Eger II EI. New inhalational agents&#x2014;desflurane and sevoflurane. <em>Can J Anaesth</em>. 1993;40(5 pt 2):R3-R8. PMID: 8500211.</li>
<li id="bib6">Eger II EI. Age, minimum alveolar anesthetic concentration, and minimum alveolar anesthetic concentration-awake. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2001;93(4):947-953. PMID: 11574362.</li>
<li id="bib7">Harris PD, Barnes R. The uses of helium and xenon in current clinical practice. <em>Anaesthesia</em>. 2008;63(3):284-293. PMID: 18289236.</li>
<li id="bib8"><a id="page163"></a>Hirota K. Special cases: ketamine, nitrous oxide and xenon. <em>Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol</em>. 2006;20(1):69-79. PMID: 16634415.</li>
<li id="bib9">Jones RM. Desflurane and sevoflurane: inhalation anaesthetics for this decade? <em>Br J Anaesth</em>. 1990;65(4):527-536 PMID: 2248821.</li>
<li id="bib10">Kharasch ED. Biotransformation of sevoflurane. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 1995;81(6 suppl):S27-S38. PMID: 7486145.</li>
<li id="bib11">Leighton KM, Koth B. Some aspects of the clinical pharmacology of nitrous oxide. <em>Can Anaesth Soc J</em>. 1973;20(1):94-103. PMID: 4571205.</li>
<li id="bib12">Sanders RD, Franks NP, Maze M. Xenon: no stranger to anaesthesia. <em>Br J Anaesth</em>. 2003;91(5):709-717. PMID: 14570795.</li>
<li id="bib13">Smith I. Nitrous oxide in ambulatory anaesthesia: does it have a place in day surgical anaesthesia or is it just a threat for personnel and the global environment? <em>Curr Opin Anaesthesiol</em>. 2006;19(6):592-596. PMID: 17093360.</li>
<li id="bib14">Smith WD. Pharmacology of nitrous oxide. <em>Int Anesthesiol Clin</em>. 1971;9(3):91-123. PMID: 4951009.<a id="page164"></a></li></ol>
<a id="page165"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp8_1" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_caf/08_Inhaled_Anesthetics/story.html'">Infographic 8.1 Inhaled Anesthetics At a Glance <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<a id="page166"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp8_2" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/8_Inhalational_Anesthetic_Agents/index.html'">Interactive Video Lecture 8. Inhalational Anesthetic Agents <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>