<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec29">IX. Venous Return</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen58">A. Vascular Compliance, Capacitance, and Control</h5>
<p class="nonindent">As blood exits the capillary bed, it passes first through venules and then a steadily decreasing number of veins of increasing size. The vascular system cross-sectional area in the small and large veins is similar to that in the small and large arteries. Compared with their corresponding arterial structures, however, venous structures are generally slightly larger in diameter, have thinner walls containing less vascular smooth muscle, and possess far greater capacitance (lower vascular resistance). This 10 to 20 times higher compliance means that veins can accommodate large changes in blood volume with only a small change in pressure. Venous smooth muscle receives SNS innervation, which when activated decreases venous compliance and promotes venous return to the RA.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen59">B. Muscle Action, Intrathoracic Pressure, and Body Position</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Venous return to the RA contributes to ventricular preload and is primarily determined by extravascular factors. These include skeletal muscle contraction in the limbs (<strong><em>muscle pump</em></strong>), intrathoracic pressure changes associated with respiratory activity (<strong><em>thoracoabdominal pump</em></strong>), external vena cava compression, and forces of gravity associated with postural changes.<sup><a href="ch003-sec10.xhtml#bib8">8</a>,<a href="ch003-sec10.xhtml#bib9">9</a></sup> Skeletal muscle contractions in the arms and legs, in combination with pressure-passive one-way venous valves in peripheral veins, augment venous return, particularly during exercise. Muscle contraction compresses veins within large muscle groups and forces venous blood centrally, whereas skeletal muscle relaxation decompresses veins and draws in blood from the distal limb and adjacent veins. Repeated compression-decompression cycles rapidly propel venous blood centrally and enhance venous return. Patients with incompetent venous valves are unable to augment their venous return with exercise or postural changes and may experience syncope under these conditions.</p>
<p class="indent">Spontaneous respiration changes the transmural pressure in veins passing through the intrathoracic cavity and modifies venous return. During inspiration, diaphragmatic descent and thoracic cage expansion create negative intrathoracic pressure, while at the same time elevating intra-abdominal pressure. These combined forces increase the pressure gradient favoring increased venous return from the subdiaphragmatic vena cava to the RA. Additionally, negative intrathoracic pressure also reduces thoracic vena cava and RA pressures and further enhances venous return from the head, neck, and upper extremities. Conversely, spontaneous expiration increases intrathoracic pressure and impairs venous return. The overall effect of spontaneous ventilation is to enhance venous return compared with apneic conditions because mean intrathoracic pressures are slightly negative over the entire respiratory cycle. In contrast, positive-pressure ventilation increases mean intrathoracic pressures, impairs venous return, and can negatively impact cardiac output, especially in settings where high levels of positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) are being utilized.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen60">C. Blood Volume and Distribution</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Total body water constitutes &#x223C;60% of body weight (42&#x00A0;L in a 70-kg person), with &#x223C;40% (28&#x00A0;L) in the intracellular space and &#x223C;20% (14&#x00A0;L) in the extracellular space. Plasma volume accounts for one-fifth (3&#x00A0;L) of the extracellular volume,<a id="page64"></a> and erythrocyte volume (2&#x00A0;L) is part of the intracellular volume; therefore, blood volume is &#x223C; 5&#x00A0;L in a 70-kg person. Blood volume is nonuniformly distributed throughout the circulatory tree, with approximately 65% in the systemic venous system, 15% in the systemic arterial system, 10% in the pulmonary circulation, and the remainder in the heart and systemic microcirculation.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>