<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/jquery.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
<!--<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-1.10.2.min.js'></script>-->
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-migrate-1.2.1.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery.qtip.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/etext.js'></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec43">VI. Metabolism and Drug Disposition</h4>
<p class="nonindent">The majority of all pharmaceuticals used in medical practice, including those used routinely in the perioperative period and the critical care setting, undergo biotransformation or elimination in the liver. Liver metabolism of such drugs, as well as other natural and synthetic substances (collectively known as xenobiotics), occurs by drug metabolizing enzymes that are genetically determined, yet can be environmentally modulated by both enzyme induction and enzyme inhibition.<sup><a href="#bib4">4</a>,<a href="#bib5">5</a></sup> The general goal of such drug metabolism is to render the compounds more hydrophilic so that renal elimination of the modified drug or its metabolites can occur.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Hepatic drug clearance depends on three factors: the intrinsic ability of the liver to metabolize a drug (ie, presence of the appropriate drug metabolizing enzyme), hepatic blood flow, and the extent of binding of the drug to blood components (eg, albumin).</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">Hepatic drug metabolism occurs through two enzyme systems, either alone or in combination. <strong><em>Phase 1 enzymes</em></strong> generally alter existing functional groups to make the molecule more polar, thereby increasing its water solubility. Phase 1 enzymes consist of the <strong><em>cytochrome P450</em></strong> (CYP superfamily) class of enzymes that hydrolyze, oxidize, or reduce the parent compound (see <a href="ch007.xhtml">Chapter 7</a>). <strong><em>Phase 2 enzymes</em></strong> act primarily to conjugate polar compounds, thereby further increasing their hydrophilicity. Both phase 1 and phase 2 enzymes are inducible but can also be inhibited (usually by other drugs).</p>
<p class="indent">A more functional description of hepatic drug disposition of pharmaceuticals draws a distinction between substances cleared rapidly (essentially on the first pass through the liver from the portal or systemic venous circulations) and those that require considerable time for metabolism. Substances that undergo significant <strong><em>first-pass elimination</em></strong> are said to have a <strong><em>high extraction ratio</em></strong>. Elimination of these drugs is largely determined by hepatic blood flow. Drugs that require a prolonged time for biotransformation are said to have a <strong><em>low extraction ratio</em></strong>. Such drugs are often protein bound in the circulation and therefore are not readily available to drug metabolizing enzymes in the liver. Intermediate between these two extremes are substances that do not clearly fall into either category are said to have an intermediate extraction ratio. Elimination of these drugs is equally dependent on blood flow and metabolic activity. Examples of drugs commonly used in the practice of anesthesiology and pain medicine are listed for each of these three categories in <strong><a href="#tt6-2">Table 6.2</a></strong>.</p>
<a id="page127"></a>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt6-2"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;6.2</span> Examples of Hepatic Clearance Patterns of Common Pharmaceuticals</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:33%;"></col>
<col style="width:33%;"></col>
<col style="width:34%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>High Clearance (High Extraction Ratio, ie, Blood Flow Dependent)</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Intermediate Clearance</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Low Clearance (Low Extraction Ratio, ie, Blood Flow Independent)</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Morphine</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Aspirin</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Warfarin</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Lidocaine</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Quinine</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Phenytoin</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Propofol</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Codeine</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Rocuronium</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Propranolol</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Nortriptyline</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Methadone</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Fentanyl</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Vecuronium</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Diazepam</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Sufentanil</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Alfentanil</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Lorazepam</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="BIBLIOGRAPHYpTitle">References</p>
<ol class="ref"><li id="bib1">Steadman RH, Braunfeld MY. The liver: surgery and anesthesia. In: Barash PG, Cullen BF, Stoelting RK, et al, eds <em>Clinical Anesthesia</em>. 8th ed. Wolters Kluwer; 2017:1298-1326.</li>
<li id="bib2">Beck C, Schawrtges I, Picker O. Perioperative liver protection. <em>Curr Opin Crit Care</em>. 2010;16:142-147. PMID: 22534730.</li>
<li id="bib3">Hoetzel A, Ryan H, Schmidt R. Anesthetic considerations for the patient with liver disease. <em>Curr Opin Anesthesiol</em>. 2012;25:340-347. PMID: 22450699.</li>
<li id="bib4">Sweeney BP, Bromilow J. Liver enzyme induction and inhibition: implications for anaesthesia. <em>Anaesthesia</em>. 2006;61:159-177. PMID: 16430569.</li>
<li id="bib5">Gupta DK, Henthorn TK. Basic principles of clinical pharmacology. In: Barash PG, Cullen BF, Stoelting RK, et al, eds. <em>Clinical Anesthesia</em>. 8th ed. Wolters Kluwer; 2017:156-188.<a id="page128"></a></li></ol>
<a id="page129"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp6_1" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_caf/06_Hepatic_Blood_Flow_Clearance/story.html'">Infographic 6.1 A Closer Look At Hepatic Blood Flow and Clearance  <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<a id="page130"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp6_2" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/6_Liver_Anatomy_and_Physiology/index.html'">Interactive Video Lecture 6. Liver Anatomy and Physiology <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>