<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec19">XII. Anesthetic Considerations in Obstructive and Restrictive Lung Disease</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen41">A. Obstructive Lung Disease</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Patients with obstructive lung disease are predisposed to having more reactive airways that could potentially lead to bronchoconstriction and significant wheezing. Because of this, one should consider administering preoperative bronchodilators and a dose of intravenous corticosteroids. The patient should also be at a relatively deep plane of anesthesia before instrumenting the airway to help lessen the chance of bronchoconstriction; opioids and lidocaine preintubation are also helpful in this regard.</p>
<p class="indent">During mechanical ventilation, it is advisable to avoid high respiratory rates and excessive tidal volume to prevent gas trapping and to allow for a longer expiratory time. Longer expiratory time may result in a lower rate of mechanical ventilation, and thus may also require that the selected tidal volume may need to be higher. If tracheal extubation is planned at the conclusion<a id="page35"></a> of the procedure, care must be taken to prevent bronchoconstriction and the resultant increase in airway resistance. Extubating the patient at a deep plane of anesthesia and using mask ventilation for emergence is a useful strategy.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen42">B. Restrictive Disease</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Patients with restrictive disease have a decrease in all measured lung volumes, including the FRC. These patients typically breath with small tidal volumes at increased rates. As discussed previously, the FRC acts as an oxygen reservoir during periods of apnea. With this reservoir reduced in capacity, patients with restrictive disease tolerate much shorter periods of apnea than normal patients. Rapid desaturation during apnea is common.</p>
<p class="indent">These patients will also require smaller tidal volumes and may have elevated peak inspiratory pressures during mechanical ventilation due to reduced lung compliance. They will likely require higher respiratory rates as well. Care must be taken during mechanical ventilation to not allow inspiratory pressures to become elevated &#x003E; 30-35 cm H<sub>2</sub>O in an effort to prevent barotrauma.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>