<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec23">III. Control of Heart Rate</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Heart rate is determined by the constantly and often instantaneously changing balance between multiple intrinsic and extrinsic factors. Key intrinsic factors include autonomic efferent innervation (both <strong><em>sympathetic nervous system</em></strong> [SNS] and <strong><em>parasympathetic nervous system</em></strong> [PNS]) (see <a href="ch004.xhtml">Chapter 4</a>), neural reflex mechanisms, humoral influences, and cardiac rhythm. Extrinsic factors include direct- and indirect-acting pharmaceutical and recreational drugs, fear, hyper- or hypothermia, and others that affect heart rate through modulation of intrinsic factors.</p>
<p class="indent">Efferent autonomic tone to the heart is initiated in the anterior (PNS) and posterior (SNS) hypothalamus and is modulated by the cardiac acceleration and cardiac slowing centers in the medulla prior to peripheral distribution. Sympathetic preganglionic fibers arising from T1 to T4 spinal levels enter the nearby paravertebral sympathetic chain, inferior cervical (stellate) ganglion, and middle cervical ganglion. They synapse with postganglionic SNS neurons that directly innervate the SA node, AV node, and myocardium via &#x03B2;<sub>1</sub>-adrenergic norepinephrine receptors. PNS preganglionic fibers to the heart arise from the brainstem and are carried in the vagus nerve. Both the right and left vagus nerves exit their respective jugular foramina, traverse the neck within the carotid sheath posterior to the carotid arteries. They course directly to the heart where they synapse with short postganglionic PNS neurons that moderate the SA and AV nodes via muscarinic acetylcholine receptors. The opposing effects of the SNS (tachycardia) and PNS (bradycardia) on the SA node normally favor vagal inhibition. As a result of this vagal predominance, load-induced increases in heart rate are first achieved by release of PNS tone and thereafter by SNS activation. Several neural reflex mechanisms can also affect heart rate, including the <strong><em>baroreceptor response, atrial distention response (Bainbridge reflex), carotid chemoreceptor reflex, Cushing reflex</em></strong>, and <strong><em>oculocardiac reflex</em></strong> (<strong><a href="#tt3-1">Table 3.1</a></strong>).</p>
<p class="indent">Humoral factors (eg, circulating catecholamines) also influence heart rate independent of the SNS and PNS. For example, the denervated heart following orthotopic heart transplantation still responds to exercise load with tachycardia, as a result of increased circulating catecholamine levels. Myocardial &#x03B2;<sub>1</sub>-adrenergic receptors can also be activated, and heart rate is increased by direct pharmacologic agonists (isoproterenol, epinephrine), agents that indirectly cause release of endogenous catecholamines (ephedrine), or drugs that impair catecholamine metabolism or reuptake (cocaine).</p>
<a id="page50"></a>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt3-1"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;3.1</span> Cardiac Reflexes That Affect Heart Rate</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:33%;"></col>
<col style="width:33%;"></col>
<col style="width:34%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Reflex</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Afferent Sensor</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Efferent Response</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Baroreceptor</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Baroreceptors sense blood pressure in carotid sinus (CN IX) and aortic arch (CN X)</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft"><em>Low blood pressure</em> &#x2192; increased SNS tone &#x2192; increased heart rate, inotropy, and vasoconstriction</p>
<p class="tbodyleft"><em>High blood pressure</em> &#x2192; increased PNS tone (CN X) &#x2192; reduced heart rate and inotropy</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Atrial Receptor (Bainbridge)</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Stretch receptors in the right atrium sense CVP (CN X)</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft"><em>High CVP</em> &#x2192; increased SNS tone and decreased PNS tone (CN X) &#x2192; increased heart rate</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Chemoreceptor</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Pao<sub>2</sub> and pH sensors in carotid bodies (CN IX) and aortic bodies (CN X)</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft"><em>Low Pao<sub>2</sub> and pH</em> &#x2192; increased ventilation and PNS tone &#x2192; decreased heart rate and inotropy</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Oculocardiac</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Stretch receptors in extraocular muscles sense pressure on globe (ciliary nerves and CN V)</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft"><em>High globe pressure</em> &#x2192; increased PNS tone (CN X) &#x2192; decreased heart rate</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Cushing</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Increased ICP</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft"><em>High ICP</em> &#x2192; increased SNS tone &#x2192; increased inotropy and vasoconstriction &#x2192; low heart rate (baroreceptor reflex)</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">CN, cranial nerve; CVP, central venous pressure; ICP, intracranial pressure; Pao<sub>2</sub>, arterial partial pressure of oxygen; PNS, parasympathetic nervous system; SNS, sympathetic nervous system.</p>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>