<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec24">IV. Coronary Physiology</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Resting <strong><em>coronary blood flow</em></strong> is approximately 250&#x00A0;mL/min (&#x223C;5% of total cardiac output) and can be increased up to 5-fold during strenuous physical exercise. Coronary blood flow is influenced by physical, neural, and metabolic factors. The primary physical factor is <strong><em>coronary perfusion pressure</em></strong>&#x2014;the difference between aortic pressure and either LV pressure (left coronary artery) or RV pressure (right coronary artery). Extravascular coronary artery compression (due to contracting myocardium), heart rate (altering the duration of diastole), vessel length, and blood viscosity also impact coronary perfusion. The primary neural factor is SNS tone to the heart, which increases coronary blood flow when increased aortic pressure outweighs reduced coronary flow associated with stronger myocardial contraction and shortened diastolic filling time (tachycardia). Active vasodilation of coronary arteries is limited because vagal stimulation has no apparent effect on vessel caliber, and unlike skeletal muscle vasculature, sympathetic cholinergic innervation is not present in coronary arteries. However, &#x03B2;<sub>2</sub>-adrenergic receptor&#x2013;mediated vasodilation can occur in small coronary arterioles and accounts for &#x223C;25% of coronary vasodilation observed during exercise-induced hyperemia. Lastly, increased myocardial metabolism is associated with the bulk of coronary vasodilation through the action of yet-to-be-defined local metabolic factors.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Because the subendocardium is exposed to higher pressures during systole than the subepicardial layer, the former is more susceptible to ischemia, particularly in settings of coronary stenosis, ventricular hypertrophy, or tachycardia.</p>
</div>
<a id="page51"></a>
<p class="indent">Coronary blood flow varies with the cardiac cycle and is determined by the difference between aortic pressure and tissue (wall) pressure. LCA flow is highly variable&#x2014;it peaks during early diastole when perfusion pressure is highest and approaches zero in early systole when LV contraction (and coronary compression) is greatest. In contrast, RCA flow is more constant throughout the cardiac cycle and peaks during systole due to the lesser muscle mass and contraction load of the normal RV. Because the subendocardium is exposed to higher pressures during systole compared to the subepicardial layer, the former is more susceptible to ischemia, particularly in settings of coronary stenosis, ventricular hypertrophy, or tachycardia. However, <strong><em>subendocardial ischemia</em></strong> is partially offset by enhanced capillary anastomoses and local metabolic vasodilation in this layer.</p>
<p class="video"><video data-id="AsOjGyY9" controls="controls" class="jwp-video" crossorigin="anonymous" style="width:100%; height:auto; width:320px; height:240px;">Browser issues</video></p>
<p class="video1" id="vid3-5"><strong>VIDEO 3.5</strong></p>
<p class="video2"><strong>Coronary Perfusion</strong></p>
<p class="indent">The heart has the highest <strong><em>oxygen extraction ratio</em></strong> of any organ (&#x223C;70%); as a result, under normal conditions, the venous oxygen saturation of blood in the coronary sinus (&#x223C;30%) is lower than that in the right atrium (&#x223C;70%). <strong><em>Myocardial oxygen consumption</em></strong> is determined by heart rate, myocardial contractility, and ventricular wall stress (including preload and afterload), with the major determinants being the heart rate and the magnitude of LV pressure developed during the isovolumic contraction period. Because of this high extraction ratio, increased myocardial oxygen demand can only be met through increased coronary blood flow. Thus, the dominant controller of coronary blood flow is myocardial oxygen consumption. The coronary circulation is ideally constructed for this purpose, as its myocardial capillary density is approximately eight times greater than that of skeletal muscle (approximately one capillary for each cardiac muscle fiber). When myocardial oxygen supply is unable to meet increases in myocardial oxygen demand (eg, coronary artery stenosis), <strong><em>myocardial ischemia</em></strong> occurs. Ischemia is first clinically manifested by increased LV end-diastolic volume and decreased LV compliance and can progress to wall motion abnormalities, decreased ejection fraction, ECG abnormalities (ST-segment changes), <strong><em>congestive heart failure</em></strong> (CHF), and ultimately <strong><em>cardiogenic shock</em></strong>.</p>
<p class="video"><video data-id="Gr6ursW6" controls="controls" class="jwp-video" crossorigin="anonymous" style="width:100%; height:auto; width:320px; height:240px;">Browser issues</video></p>
<p class="video1" id="vid3-6"><strong>VIDEO 3.6</strong></p>
<p class="video2"><strong>Myocardial Oxygen Supply-Demand</strong></p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>