<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<section epub:type="chapter">
<div id="main_container">
<header>
<h1 id="c01" class="chapter_name"><a id="page167"></a><span class="chapter_name">9</span></h1>
<h2 class="chapter_title">Intravenous Anesthetics and Sedatives</h2>
<p class="author">Jessica R. Black and Sara E. Meitzen</p>
</header>
<p class="nonindent">The use of intravenous (IV) anesthetic agents has progressed from the rapid induction of anesthesia to total IV anesthesia (TIVA). TIVA has, in several institutions, it has become the anesthetic of choice for maintenance of anesthesia.</p>
<p class="indent">All IV anesthetics are sedative-hypnotics that have the capacity to produce a drug-induced continuum of decreasing consciousness ranging from anxiolysis to general anesthesia. For less invasive procedures, monitored anesthesia care (MAC) is maintained using lower dosages of IV anesthetics. Higher dosages are used to induce general anesthesia and TIVA.</p>
<p class="indent">Our current repertoire of IV anesthetics are derived from a variety of pharmacologic drug groups. None are perfect, though each drug combines many of the characteristics of the ideal IV anesthetic: fast-onset, hemodynamic stability, hypnosis, amnesia, analgesia, and rapid recovery. For some IV anesthetics, notable untoward side effects have led to more specific indications (eg, ketamine, etomidate). Today, propofol is by far the most popular and widely used IV anesthetic.</p>
<p class="indent">All IV anesthetics are lipophilic and thus have high affinity for lipophilic tissues (brain, spinal cord), which accounts for their rapid onset. As the medication arrives at the effect site and binds to its target receptors (its mechanism of action), the onset of sedation begins. After the drug produces its pharmacodynamic (PD) effect, the body then gets rid of the drug via its pharmacokinetic profile. Regardless of how fast the drug is metabolized, the termination effect of a single induction bolus dose is due to redistribution from highly perfused lipophilic areas into less perfused areas such as skeletal muscle and fat. Consequently, all induction doses of IV anesthetics have a comparable duration of action despite substantial differences in their metabolism.</p>
</div>
</section>
</body>
</html>