<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/jquery.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
<!--<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-1.10.2.min.js'></script>-->
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-migrate-1.2.1.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery.qtip.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/etext.js'></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec20">XIII. Postoperative Pulmonary Function and Complications</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen43">A. Postoperative Pulmonary Function</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The main alteration in postoperative lung mechanics is a restrictive defect. This change occurs in nearly all patients, and as a result, patients tend to breathe faster and shallower. With any type of operation under general anesthesia, the FRC does not return to its preoperative level for up to a week, perhaps even a few weeks for operations involving a sternotomy.<sup><a href="#bib2">2</a></sup></p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen44">B. Postoperative Pulmonary Complications</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Two significant postoperative complications specifically related to the respiratory system are atelectasis and pneumonia. PPCs lead to not only increased cost and patient length of stay but also significant morbidity and mortality.<sup><a href="#bib16">16</a></sup> The incidence of these two complications is related to the site of surgery. Open upper abdominal operations have a much higher rate, lower abdominal and thoracic have a slightly lower rate than upper abdominal surgery, and all other peripheral operations have the lowest risk. There are a number of strategies to consider preventing pulmonary complications. Smoking cessation is an adjustable preoperative modifiable risk factor that should ideally be addressed 8&#x00A0;weeks prior to elective surgery. If patients stop smoking within 4&#x00A0;weeks of surgery, they may benefit from improved mucociliary function; however, sputum production may increase leading to the development of PPCs. When able, providers should consider regional techniques instead of general anesthesia, but if general anesthesia is needed, anesthesiologists should consider lung protective ventilation, use of PEEP, use of recruitment maneuvers and assure adequate reversal of neuromuscular blocking agents.<sup><a href="#bib16">16</a></sup> Postoperative strategies used to avoid PPCs focus on improving lung expansion. The use of incentive spirometry is widespread and very helpful when used appropriately. Many patients use the device incorrectly or not often enough, so training and monitoring by the staff caring for the patient is crucial. Early patient ambulation is vital to prevent PPCs. Having adequate analgesia is also helpful so that the above strategies can effectively be used. Adequate analgesia can be achieved with a multimodal approach using parenteral or intravenous medications, neuraxial analgesics, or regional techniques. The analgesic techniques employed depend on the surgical site and individual patient characteristics.<sup><a href="#bib2">2</a></sup></p>
<a id="page36"></a>
<p class="BIBLIOGRAPHYpTitle">References</p>
<ol class="ref"><li id="bib1">Tomashefski JF, Farver CF. Anatomy and histology of the lung. In: Tomashefski JF, Cagle PT, Farver CF, et al, eds. <em>Dail and Hammar&#x2019;s Pulmonary Pathology</em>. Vol 2. 3rd ed. Springer; 2008:20-48.</li>
<li id="bib2">Tamul PC, Ault ML. Respiratory function in anesthesia. In: Barash P, Cullen B, Stoelting R, et al, eds. <em>Clinical Anesthesia</em>. 8th ed. Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott Williams &#x0026; Wilkins; 2017:361-383.</li>
<li id="bib3">Butterworth JF IV, Mackey DC, Wasnick JD. <em>Respiratory Physiology &#x0026; Anesthesia. Morgan &#x0026; Mikhail&#x2019;s Clinical Anesthesiology</em>. 6th ed. McGraw-Hill; 2018.</li>
<li id="bib4">Talmor D, Sarge T, Malhotra A, et al. Mechanical ventilation guided by esophageal pressure in acute lung injury. <em>N Engl J Med</em>. 2008;359(20):2095-2104. PMID: 19001507.</li>
<li id="bib5">Bigatello L, Pesenti A. Respiratory physiology for the anesthesiologist. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2019;130(6):1064-1077. PMID: 30998510.</li>
<li id="bib6">Guz A. Regulation of respiration in man. <em>Annu Rev Physiol</em>. 1975;37:303-323.</li>
<li id="bib7">Berger AJ, Mitchell RA, Severinghaus JW, et al. Regulation of respiration. <em>N Engl J Med</em>. 1977;297(2,3,4):92-97, 138-143, 194-201. PMID: 865581.</li>
<li id="bib8">Stock MD, Downs JB, McDonald JS, et al. The carbon dioxide rate of rise in awake apneic humans. <em>J Clin Anesth</em>. 1988;1:96. PMID: 3152423.</li>
<li id="bib9">Weil JV, Byrne-Quinn E, Sodal IE, et al. Hypoxic ventilatory drive in normal man. <em>J Clin Invest</em>. 1970;49:1061-1072. PMID: 5422012.</li>
<li id="bib10">Tyuma I. The Bohr effect and the Haldane effect in human hemoglobin. <em>Jpn J Physiol</em>. 1984;34(2):205-216 PMID: 6433091.</li>
<li id="bib11">Galvin I, Drummond GB, Nirmalan M. Distribution of blood flow and ventilation in the lung: gravity is not the only factor. <em>Br J Anaesth</em>. 2007;98(4):420-428. PMID: 17347182.</li>
<li id="bib12">West JB, Dollery CT, Naimark A. Distribution of blood-flow and pressure-flow relations of the whole lung. <em>J Appl Physiol</em>. 1965;20:175-183.</li>
<li id="bib13">Hyatt R, Scanlon P, Nakamura M. <em>Spirometry: dynamic lung volumes</em>. In: <em>Interpretation of Pulmonary Function Tests: A Practical Guide</em>. 3rd ed. Lippincott Williams &#x0026; Wilkins; 2009:5-25.</li>
<li id="bib14">Hyatt R, Scanlon P, Nakamura M. <em>Diffusing capacity of the lungs</em>. In: <em>Interpretation of Pulmonary Function Tests: A Practical Guide</em>. 3rd ed. Lippincott Williams &#x0026; Wilkins; 2009:41-49.</li>
<li id="bib15">American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Preanesthesia Evaluation. Practice advisory for preanesthesia evaluation: an updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists task force on preanesthesia evaluation. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2012;116:522-539. PMID: 22273990.</li>
<li id="bib16">Miskovic A, Lumb AB. Postoperative pulmonary complications. <em>Br J Anaesth</em>. 2017;118(3):317-334. PMID: 28186222.</li>
</ol>
<a id="page37"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp2_1" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_caf/02_Respiratory_System/story.html'">Infographic 2.1 A Closer Look at Positive Pressure Ventilation <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<a id="page38"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp2_2" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/02_Coexisting_Diseases_Impacting_Anesthetic_Mngmt/index.html'">Interactive Video Lecture 02. Coexisting Diseases Impacting Anesthetic Mngmt <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<a id="page39"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp2_3" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/2A_The_Respiratory_System/index.html'">Interactive Video Lecture 2a. The Respiratory System <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<a id="page40"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp2_4" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/2B_The_Respiratory_System/index.html'">Interactive Video Lecture 2b. The Respiratory System <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<div class="link-me" id="grp2_5" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/2C_The_Respiratory_System/index.html'">Interactive Video Lecture 2c. The Respiratory System <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>