<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec5">IV. Neuromuscular-Blocking Agents</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Curare has been used for centuries by Amerindians of South America. Applied to arrows and darts, its paralyzing effects were originally employed for hunting and warfare. Through accounts from Spanish exploration of the area, news of curare and its effects reached Europe. Initially, medical applications for curare were limited; however, with the introduction of<a id="page7"></a> endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation, curare could be used to prevent laryngospasm during laryngoscopy and relax abdominal muscles during surgical procedures. In 1942, Griffith and Johnson introduced the first drug form of curare called intocostrin. Intocostrin facilitated both tracheal intubation and abdominal muscle relaxation, allowing for a more optimized surgical patient. Although other muscle relaxants were studied, they were subsequently discarded due to undesirable autonomic nervous system effects. The next great step in neuromuscular-blocking agents came in 1949 with the synthesis of the depolarizing neuromuscular-blocking agent <strong><em>succinylcholine</em></strong> by Nobel Laureate Daniel Bovet (1907-1992). Nondepolarizing neuromuscular-blocking agents such as vecuronium and rocuronium, as well as atracurium and cis-atracurium, were introduced into clinical practice in the late 20th century.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">The first pharmaceutical form of curare was introduced in 1942, marking the beginning of the use of neuromuscular-blocking agents during surgical procedures.</p>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>