<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/jquery.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
<!--<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-1.10.2.min.js'></script>-->
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-migrate-1.2.1.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery.qtip.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/etext.js'></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec7">VI. Modern Anesthesiology Practice</h4>
<p class="nonindent">In the early 1900s, Sir Robert Macintosh and Sir Ivan Magill made significant contributions to airway management, primarily by facilitating endotracheal intubation through the development of simple laryngoscopes. Anesthesiology further evolved in the second half of the 20th century with a proliferation of residency training programs and a strong emphasis on safety. In 1985, the <strong><em>Anesthesia Patient Safety Foundation</em></strong> was established with a mission &#x201C;to ensure that no patient is harmed by anesthesia.&#x201D; Additional monitoring tools such as blood gas analysis, pulse oximetry, and capnometry notably decreased mortality rates during anesthetic procedures. In the 21st century, there have been significant refinements in anesthesia delivery systems, such as with microprocessor-controlled anesthesia machines and mechanical ventilators, and real-time data collection with an electronic medical record.</p>
<p class="indent">Presently, the <strong><em>American Society of Anesthesiologists</em></strong> provides <strong><em>guidelines</em></strong> for anesthesiology. The stated goals of this professional organization are to establish &#x201C;an educational, research, and scientific association of physicians organized to raise and maintain the standards of anesthesiology and to improve the care of patients.&#x201D;</p>
<p class="indent">The history of nurses administering anesthesia in the United States is intertwined with the rapid development of the country after the 1840s and the relative scarcity of physicians. It is known that nurses provided anesthesia as early as the Civil War, but it was not until 1956 that the term <strong><em>certified registered nurse anesthetist (CRNA)</em></strong> was introduced. In 2013, the Emery Rovenstine Memorial Lecture, considered by many the main event during the American Society of Anesthesiologists&#x2019; annual meeting, addressed the competition between anesthesiologists and nurse anesthetists to provide anesthesia care.<a id="page8"></a> The American Society of Anesthesiologists supports a physician-led model for anesthesia care known as the <strong><em>anesthesia care team</em></strong>. On the other hand, the <strong><em>American Association of Nurse Anesthetists</em></strong>, the organization representing nurse anesthetists, promotes independent practice and is aggressively lobbying in legislative and regulatory arenas to achieve their goal. In 2001, Medicare allowed states to opt out of a regulation that required CRNAs to administer anesthetics under the supervision of a physician, and today there are several federal and state jurisdictions allowing CRNAs to practice independently. The controversy over who can administer anesthesia independently, which may have financial and quality of care implications, continues to be debated.</p>
<p class="indent">The current economic environment will test anesthesiology as a service to patients and as an area of specialization for physicians. The diversity in the composition of the anesthesia care team varies across the country and will continue to change as economic pressures evolve. Although some may view the current challenges as a menace for this medical specialty, many find opportunities for improvement.</p>
<p class="indent">Three different approaches to the delivery of anesthesia care in the United States are currently used. Most anesthetics are delivered by a team typically comprising an anesthesiologist, a CRNA, and an anesthesiologist assistant or a resident. However, there are anesthesiologists delivering anesthesia care themselves in a &#x201C;physician-only&#x201D; model, and in some areas of the country, there are CRNAs working alone. In recent years, individual practices have merged into large groups, and anesthesia practice management has become more demanding and complex.</p>
<p class="indent">Today, anesthesiologists act as perioperative physicians capable of coordinating pre-, intra-, and postoperative care. The versatility and skills of anesthesiologists were tested during the Covid-19 pandemic, during which they served as specialized airway and mechanical ventilator management teams. Many anesthesiologists act as part- or full-time providers of intensive care, pain management, or other nonoperating room services. Students interested in pursuing a career in anesthesiology must be passionate about the specialty, excel academically, and have a unique predisposition blending a calm and poised attitude with the ability to make swift decisions and take immediate action. Considering the aging population and the ever-increasing need for health care, including surgical procedures, anesthesiology as a profession has a bright future.</p>
<p class="BIBLIOGRAPHYpTitle">References</p>
<ol class="ref"><li id="bib1">Ortega RA, Mai C. History of anesthesia. In: Vacanti CA, Sikka PK, Urman RD, et al, eds. <em>Essential Clinical Anesthesia</em>. Cambridge University Press; 2011:1-6.</li>
<li id="bib2">Haridas RP. Horace Wells&#x2019; demonstration of nitrous oxide in Boston. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2013;119(5):1014-1022. PMID: 23962967.</li>
<li id="bib3">Zeitlin GL, Charles Thomas Jackson, &#x201C;The Head Behind the Hands.&#x201D; Applying science to implement discovery in early nineteenth century America. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2009;110(3):687-688.</li>
<li id="bib4">Bigelow HJ. Insensibility during surgical operations produced by inhalation. <em>Boston Med Surg J</em>. 1846;16:309-317.</li>
<li id="bib5">Ortega RA, Lewis KP, Hansen CJ. Other monuments to inhalation anesthesia. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2008;109(4):578-587. PMID: 18813035.</li>
</ol>
<a id="page9"></a>
<a id="page10"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp1_1" onclick="openLinkInNewTab('https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/01_History_and_Future_Test/index.html');">Interactive Video Lecture 1. History and Future Test <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>