<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec18"><a id="page34"></a>XI. Preoperative Pulmonary Assessment</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Much of the preoperative assessment regarding pulmonary function is aimed at identifying patients who may be at greater risk for postoperative pulmonary complications (PPCs). It is also an opportunity to assess the baseline pulmonary characteristics of the patient that may guide clinical decision-making intra- and postoperatively. For any patient, the most important part of the preoperative evaluation is the history and physical examination. Beyond this, ancillary tests that can be considered are as follows:</p>
<ul class="bblue"><li><span>Chest radiography</span></li>
<li><span>Arterial blood gas</span></li>
<li><span>Spirometry</span></li></ul>
<p class="indent">The decision to pursue further testing and the specific tests one orders should be tailored both to the individual patient&#x2019;s condition as well as the operation or procedure the patient is about to undergo. The American Society of Anesthesiologists guidelines on preoperative pulmonary evaluation state that clinicians should &#x201C;balance the risks and costs of these evaluations against their benefits. Clinical characteristics to consider include type and invasiveness of the surgical procedure, interval from previous evaluation, treated or symptomatic asthma, symptomatic COPD, and scoliosis with restrictive function.&#x201D;<sup><a href="ch002-sec13.xhtml#bib15">15</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Some conditions that predispose to derangements in pulmonary function are as follows:</p>
<ul class="bblue"><li><span>Chronic lung disease</span></li>
<li><span>Smoking history, persistent cough, or wheezing</span></li>
<li><span>Chest wall and spinal deformities</span></li>
<li><span>Morbid obesity</span></li>
<li><span>Requirement for single-lung ventilation or lung resection</span></li>
<li><span>Severe neuromuscular disease</span></li></ul>
<p class="video"><video data-id="5RC2g74d" controls="controls" class="jwp-video" crossorigin="anonymous" style="width:100%; height:auto; width:320px; height:240px;">Browser issues</video></p>
<p class="video1" id="vid2-9"><strong>VIDEO 2.9</strong></p>
<p class="video2"><strong>Smoking Cigarettes</strong></p>
<p class="indent">Again, the most important part of any evaluation regarding pulmonary status is the history and physical examination. Any test that is ordered should be done with a specific purpose in mind, for example, knowing the baseline Pa<small>CO</small><sub>2</sub> or Pa<small>O</small><sub>2</sub> of a patient with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in order to help guide the decision to extubate at the conclusion of the anesthetic course.<sup><a href="ch002-sec13.xhtml#bib2">2</a></sup></p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>