<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/jquery.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
<!--<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-1.10.2.min.js'></script>-->
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-migrate-1.2.1.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery.qtip.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/etext.js'></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec37">V. Diuretic Drugs: Effects and Mechanisms</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen85">A. The Physiologic Basis of Diuretic Action</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Diuretic drugs act on the mechanism that moves sodium ions from the tubular lumen into the cell where they can then be pumped across the basolateral surface by NA<sup>+</sup>/K<sup>+</sup> ATPase and reabsorbed. Diuretics are typically classified according to their site of action in the nephron (<strong><a href="ch005-sec04.xhtml#tt5-13">Table 5.13</a></strong>). Diuretics are used in the management of several conditions, most notably hypertension and congestive heart failure. Choice of agent is based on underlying comorbities.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Excessive increases in intrathoracic pressure caused by controlled ventilation or intra-abdominal hypertension caused by surgery or fluid overload can compromise renal blood flow.</p>
</div>
<p class="BIBLIOGRAPHYpTitle">References</p>
<ol class="ref"><li id="bib1">Sipos A, Vargas A, Peti-Peterdi J. Direct demonstration of tubular fluid flow sensing by macula densa cells. <em>Am J Physiol Renal Physiol</em>. 2010;299(5):F1087-F1093.</li>
<li id="bib2">Burke M, Pabbidi MR, Farley J, et al. Molecular mechanisms of renal blood flow autoregulation. <em>Curr Vasc Pharmacol</em>. 2014;12:1-14.</li>
<li id="bib3">DiBona GF. Nervous kidney: interaction between renal sympathetic nerves and the renin-angiotensin system in the control of renal function. <em>Hypertension</em>. 2000;36(6):1083-1088.</li>
<li id="bib4"><a id="page110"></a>McDonough AA. Mechanisms of proximal tubule sodium transport regulation that link extracellular fluid volume and blood pressure. <em>Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol</em>. 2010;298(4):R851-R861.</li>
<li id="bib5">Carey RM. The intrarenal renin-angiotensin and dopaminergic systems: control of renal sodium excretion and blood pressure. <em>Hypertension</em>. 2013;61:673-680.</li>
<li id="bib6">Sadowski J, Badzynska B. Intrarenal vasodilator systems: NO, prostaglandins and bradykinin. An integrative approach. <em>J Physiol Pharmacol</em>. 2008;59(suppl 9):105-119.</li>
<li id="bib7">U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. <em>National Kidney Disease and Education Program</em>. Estimating GFR. Accessed September 9, 2020. <a href="http://nkdep.nih.gov/lab-evaluation/gfr/estimating.shtml">http://nkdep.nih.gov/lab-evaluation/gfr/estimating.shtml</a></li>
<li id="bib8">MD+CALC. <em>Creatinine Clearance (Cockcroft-Gault Equation)</em>. Accessed September 8, 2020. <a href="http://www.mdcalc.com/creatinine-clearance-cockcroft-gault-equation/">http://www.mdcalc.com/creatinine-clearance-cockcroft-gault-equation/</a></li>
<li id="bib9">Chen LX, Koyner JL. Biomarkers in acute kidney injury. <em>Crit Care Clin</em>. 2015;31:633-648.</li>
<li id="bib10">Gumbert SD, Kork F, Jackson ML, et al. Perioperative acute kidney injury. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2020;132:180-204.</li>
<li id="bib11">Ostermann M, Joannidis M. Acute kidney injury 2016: diagnosis and diagnostic workup. <em>Crit Care</em>. 2016;20:299.</li>
<li id="bib12">Hobson C, Ruchi R, Bihorac A. Perioperative acute kidney injury: risk factors and predictive strategies. <em>Crit Care Clin</em>. 2017;33:379-396.</li>
<li id="bib13">Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) CKD Work Group. KDIGO 2012 clinical practice guideline for the evaluation and management of chronic kidney disease. <em>Kidney Int Suppl</em>. 2013;3(1):1-150. Accessed September 20, 2020. <a href="http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/pdf/CKD/KDIGO_2012_CKD_GL.pdf">www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/pdf/CKD/KDIGO_2012_CKD_GL.pdf</a></li>
<li id="bib14">Griffiths RS, Olyaei AJ. <em>Drug dosing in patients with chronic disease</em>. In: <em>Nephrology Secrets</em>. 3rd ed. Wolters Kluwer; 2012:197-206.</li>
<li id="bib15">Gabardi S, Abramson S. Drug dosing in chronic kidney disease. <em>Med Clin North Am</em>. 2005;89(3):649-687.</li>
<li id="bib16">Xue F, Zhang W, Chu HC. Assessing perioperative dexmedetomidine reduces the incidence and severity of acute kidney injury following valvular heart surgery. <em>Kidney Int</em>. 2016;89:1164.</li>
<li id="bib17">Shi R, Tie HT. Dexmedetomidine as a promising prevention strategy for cardiac surgery-associated acute kidney injury: a meta-analysis. <em>Crit Care</em>. 2017;21:198.</li>
<li id="bib18">Myles PS, Bellomo R, Corcoran T, et al. Restrictive versus liberal fluid therapy for major abdominal surgery. <em>N Engl J Med</em>. 2018;378:2263-2274.</li>
<li id="bib19">Young P, Bailey M, Beasley R, et al. Effect of a buffered crystalloid solution vs saline on acute kidney injury among patients in the intensive care unit: the SPLIT randomized clinical trial. <em>J Am Med Assoc</em>. 2015;314:1701-1710.</li>
<li id="bib20">Self WH, Semler MW, Wanderer JP, et al. Balanced crystalloids versus saline in noncritically ill adults. <em>N Engl J Med</em>. 2018;378:819-828.</li>
<li id="bib21">Semler MW, Self WH, Wanderer JP, et al. Balanced crystalloids versus saline in critically ill adults. <em>N Engl J Med</em>. 2018;378:829-839.</li>
<li id="bib22">Perner A, Haase N, Guttormsen AB, et al. Hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.42 versus Ringer&#x2019;s acetate in severe sepsis. <em>N Engl J Med</em>. 2012;367:124-134.</li>
<li id="bib23">Myburgh JA, Finfer S, Bellomo R, et al. Hydroxyethyl starch or saline for fluid resuscitation in intensive care. <em>N Engl J Med</em>. 2012;367:1901-1911.<a id="page111"></a><a id="page112"></a></li></ol>
<a id="page113"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp5_1" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_caf/05_Renal_Protection/story.html'">Infographic 5.1 A Closer Look At Renal Protection <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<a id="page114"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp5_2" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/5_Renal_System/index.html'">Interactive Video Lecture 5. Renal System <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>