<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec8">I. Muscles of Ventilation</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen11">A. Diaphragm</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The diaphragm, the main muscle of ventilation, completes the majority of the work of breathing. The diaphragm is anchored by a mobile central tendon that originates from the vertebral bodies, lower ribs, and sternum. During inspiration, the diaphragm contracts and negative pressure is generated in the intrapleural space causing inflow of gas into the lungs. As the diaphragm relaxes, exhalation ensues and the volume within the thoracic cavity decreases forcing gas to leave the lungs. During nonstrenuous breathing, exhalation is mainly passive. Approximately 50% of the diaphragm&#x2019;s musculature is composed of fatigue-resistant, slow-twitch muscle fibers,<sup><a href="ch002-sec13.xhtml#bib1">1</a>,<a href="ch002-sec13.xhtml#bib2">2</a></sup> allowing the diaphragm to maintain normal respiration without developing fatigue.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">During nonstrenuous breathing, the diaphragm does most of the work inspiration and that exhalation is mainly passive.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen12">B. Accessory Muscles</h5>
<p class="nonindent">As the work of breathing increases, accessory skeletal muscles in addition to the diaphragm are utilized. The external intercostal muscles assist in inhalation, while the internal intercostal muscles to some degree provide support for exhalation. The most important expiratory accessory muscles are the abdominal muscles that assist in depressing the ribs and producing forced exhalation through an increase in intra-abdominal pressure. Additionally, abdominal muscles play a pivotal role in generating the propulsive expiratory force involved with coughing and maintaining adequate bronchial hygiene. The cervical strap muscles are the most important inspiratory accessory muscles, and they help to elevate the sternum<a id="page12"></a> and upper chest to increase thoracic cavity dimensions. The scalene muscles help prevent inward motion of the ribs, while the sternocleidomastoid muscles help to elevate the upper part of the rib cage. As the work of breathing continues to increase, the large back and paravertebral muscles become involved. Importantly, as the accessory muscles are skeletal muscles, they are prone to fatigue.<sup><a href="ch002-sec13.xhtml#bib1">1</a>,<a href="ch002-sec13.xhtml#bib2">2</a></sup></p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>