<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec15">VIII. Tissue Oxygenation Assessment</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Appropriate tissue oxygenation is a central tenet of anesthetic practice. Quantitative evaluations of oxygenation allow for a better understanding of the etiology of hypoxia or poor tissue oxygenation. The alveolar gas equation calculates the highest possible alveolar partial pressure of oxygen. Also, of importance, the equation demonstrates how increased carbon dioxide concentration will result in decreased arterial oxygenation. As described by the equation, increasing the inspired concentration of oxygen can overcome the deficiency in the oxygen gradient caused by hypoventilation. The equation also allows comparisons of alveolar and arterial oxygen partial pressures. Significant differences between alveolar and arterial partial pressure of oxygen may indicate ventilation-perfusion mismatch or alveolar-pulmonary capillary diffusion impairment. Fortunately, alveolar-pulmonary capillary diffusion impairment is rarely clinically significant and can be overcome with supplemental oxygen except for the most extreme situations.</p>
<p class="indent">Ventilation-perfusion mismatch in the form of shunt is the most common cause of poor oxygenation. The amount of shunt can be calculated using the shunt fraction equation or ventilation-perfusion ratio but requires a pulmonary artery to measure mixed venous saturation. If arterial oxygenation is adequate and tissue oxygenation is still poor, the ability to deliver oxygen is investigated. Assuming delivery of blood is adequate with normal cardiovascular function, the oxygen-carrying capacity of blood is analyzed with the oxygen content equation. The oxygen content equation highlights the reliance on hemoglobin to meet tissue oxygen needs. If tissue oxygenation is poor despite adequate arterial oxygenation and hemoglobin content, abnormal hemoglobin or tissue metabolism should be considered. Tissue oxygenation requires complex physiologic processes, which may be better elucidated quantitatively when problems arise.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>