<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec1">Introduction</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Most medical textbooks begin by discussing the history of the subject. Why? Succinctly stated, we only learn from the past. Although modern anesthesiology is practiced in today&#x2019;s future-driven environment, there is much to learn by analyzing the historical evolution of the specialty.</p>
<p class="indent">The field of anesthesiology is at a turning point that will define the future course of the profession. Today, anesthesiologists face new challenges, from utilizing new drugs and sophisticated instrumentation, to expanding their roles in perioperative medicine and critical care, to confronting professional competition and health care reform.</p>
<p class="indent">Understanding how and why anesthetics came into use, how they have evolved, and how the profession has grown is essential for a true understanding of the specialty and anticipating new forays into the future.</p>
<p class="indent">In the 2020 Covid-19 pandemic, anesthesiologists were at the forefront of patient care and the specialty&#x2019;s contributions to medicine were reaffirmed. Serendipitously, Dr John Snow, considered by many to be the father of epidemiology, and Dr Jerome Adams, the Surgeon General of the United States during the pandemic, are both anesthesiologists. This coincidence provides the historical framework for many of the details presented in this chapter.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>