<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec2">I. Pain and Antiquity</h4>
<p class="nonindent">From early Mesopotamian and Egyptian cultures to Asian and Central American cultures, practices for the relief of pain have existed for centuries. For instance, the Greek physician Dioscorides reported on the analgesic properties of the mandrake plant, 2000&#x00A0;years ago. With the advent of surgical medicine, various combinations of substances, including opium, alcohol, and marijuana, were inhaled by diverse cultures for their mind-altering and analgesic effects. The &#x201C;soporific sponge,&#x201D; which was popular between the 9th and 13th centuries, became the primary mode of delivering pain relief to patients during surgical operations. The sponges were saturated with a solution derived from the combination of poppies, mandrake leaves, and various herbs. Before the surgical procedure, the sponge was moistened with hot water to reconstitute the ingredients and then placed over the mouth and nose so the patient could inhale the anesthetic vapors. <strong><em>Laudanum</em></strong>, an opium derivative prepared as a tincture in the 16th century by Paracelsus (1493-1541) was used as an analgesic. However, like other medications of the time, it was also prescribed<a id="page2"></a> for a variety of diseases such as meningitis, cardiac disease, and tuberculosis. In Indian culture, avatars such as Dhanwantari used anesthetics for surgical pain and severed nerves for relief of neuralgia. Chinese physicians have used acupuncture and various herbal substances to ease surgical pain for centuries. In 1804, <strong><em>Seishu Hanaoka</em></strong> (1760-1835), a surgeon from Japan, induced general anesthesia with a herbal combination containing anticholinergic alkaloids capable of inducing unconsciousness. Hanaoka developed an enteral formulation called <strong><em>tsusensan</em></strong>. His patients would ingest this concoction before Hanaoka would begin the surgical procedure.<sup><a href="ch001-sec07.xhtml#bib1">1</a></sup></p>
<p class="video"><video data-id="6VoJWZlB" controls="controls" class="jwp-video" crossorigin="anonymous" style="width:100%; height:auto; width:320px; height:240px;">Browser issues</video></p>
<p class="video1" id="vid1-1"><strong>VIDEO 1.1</strong></p>
<p class="video2"><strong>Anesthesia History Timeline</strong></p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>