<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec57">II. Comparative Physiochemical and Clinical Pharmacologic Properties</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen114">A. Barbiturates</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The most commonly used barbiturates are the thiobarbiturates&#x2014;thiopental (Pentothal, 5-ethyl-5-[1-methylbutyl]-2-thiobarbituric acid) and thiamylal (Surital, 5-allyl-5-[1-methylbutyl]-2-thiobarbituric acid)&#x2014;and the oxybarbiturate&#x2014;methohexital (Brevital, 1-methyl-5-allyl-5-[1-methyl-2-pentanyl]<br/>barbituric acid).</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Commonly used intravenous anesthetic agents such as the barbiturates, propofol, benzodiazepines, and etomidate act at the site of the GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">Barbiturates are formulated as sodium salts and are reconstituted in water or isotonic sodium chloride (0.9%) to prepare 2.5% thiopental, 1% to 2% methohexital, and 2% thiamylal. These preparations are highly alkaline (pH 9-10), and when added to lactated Ringer or other acidic drug preparations, crystalline precipitation will occur and will irreversibly occlude IV tubing and catheters. Barbiturates rarely cause pain on injection but will cause significant tissue irritation if injected paravenously (ie, into an infiltrated line). Inadvertent intra-arterial injection of thiobarbiturates causes serious complications: crystal formation causing intense vasoconstriction, thrombosis, and tissue necrosis. Immediate treatment includes intra-arterial papaverine and lidocaine or procaine, regional anesthesia&#x2013;induced sympathectomy (stellate ganglion block, brachial plexus block), and heparinization.</p>
<p class="indent">Barbiturates depress the reticular activating system in the brain stem, a center of consciousness control, and are believed to potentiate the action of GABA<sub>A</sub> receptors, increasing the duration of an associated chloride ion channel opening. They decrease cerebral metabolic rate of oxygen (CMRO<sub>2</sub>), cerebral blood flow (CBF), and intracranial pressure (ICP). They can induce an isoelectric electroencephalogram (EEG), maximally decreasing CMRO<sub>2</sub>.<sup><a href="ch009-sec03.xhtml#bib2">2</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Thiopental&#x2019;s side effects include decreased respiratory rate, apnea, cardiac arrhythmias, cardiovascular depression, headache, nausea, prolonged awakening, and hangover effects. Methohexital&#x2019;s side effects are similar to thiopental and include respiratory depression, apnea, hiccoughs, cardiovascular depression, and laryngospasm. Of note, a similar concentration of methohexital produces less hypotension than thiopental as the reflex tachycardic response to hypotension is not as acutely blunted compared to thiopental.<sup><a href="ch009-sec03.xhtml#bib3">3</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">The anesthetic action of the barbiturates is primarily terminated by redistribution from the central lipophilic tissues of the brain to peripheral lean muscle compartments. Barbiturates undergo slow terminal elimination via hepatic metabolism, biliary conjugation, and renal excretion leading to a half-life of 10 to 12 hours. Methohexital clearance is more dependent on hepatic blood flow allowing for a shorter elimination half-life of 4 hours.</p>
<a id="page173"></a>
<p class="indent">Care should be taken in patients with porphyrias for barbiturates promote aminolevulinic acid synthetase (barbituric acid is broken down into malonic acid and urea), stimulating porphyrin formation, and can precipitate AIP or variegate porphyria. Acute attacks are usually intermittent and present as severe abdominal pain, peripheral neuropathy, psychiatric symptoms, autonomic dysfunction, and hyponatremia.<sup><a href="ch009-sec03.xhtml#bib3">3</a></sup> Barbiturates are strictly contraindicated in patients with a history of AIP.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen115">B. Propofol</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Propofol (Diprivan, 2, 6-diisopropylphenol), an oil at room temperature, is insoluble in water. Thus, propofol was introduced as an emulsion: a 1% (10&#x00A0;mg/mL) egg lecithin (egg yolk) formulation consisting of 10% (100&#x00A0;mg/mL) soybean oil, 2.25% (22.5&#x00A0;mg/mL) glycerol, and 1.2% (12.5&#x00A0;mg/mL) egg phosphatide. Each addition to propofol to make the emulsion provides an important role: soybean oil dissolves propofol, glycerol produces isotonicity with blood, and egg lecithin provides stability of the propofol-soybean droplets. These small droplets have large surface areas for rapid diffusion of propofol once injected into the blood stream. The size range of the stable droplets of emulsion refracts light and creates a milky color.<sup><a href="ch009-sec03.xhtml#bib4">4</a></sup> To prevent microbial contamination, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (0.005%) was added to the solution.</p>
<p class="video"><video data-id="TMw1GvkI" controls="controls" class="jwp-video" crossorigin="anonymous" style="width:100%; height:auto; width:320px; height:240px;">Browser issues</video></p>
<p class="video1" id="vid9-2"><strong>VIDEO 9.2</strong></p>
<p class="video2"><strong>Propofol</strong></p>
<p class="indent">This propofol emulsion often causes venoirritation upon injection into small hand veins. The pain can be minimized by injection into larger veins and by mixing lidocaine with propofol (eg, adding 2&#x00A0;mL 1% lidocaine to 20&#x00A0;mL propofol) or injecting lidocaine alone prior to the propofol injection.</p>
<p class="indent">Propofol increases the binding affinity of GABA with the GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor. Coupled to a chloride channel, the activation leads to the hyperpolarization of the nerve membrane and is similar to the mechanism of action of the barbiturates. It causes a decrease in arterial blood pressure due to a simultaneous decrease in systemic vascular resistance and a decrease in preload (caused by inhibition of sympathetic tone and direct vascular smooth muscle effect) and negative cardiac inotropy. It also blunts the baroreflex to hypotension, causing a smaller compensatory increase in heart rate than expected for a given drop in blood, thus further exaggerating the hypotension caused. These effects are dose and concentration dependent.</p>
<p class="indent">Propofol decreases CMRO<sub>2</sub>, CBF, and ICP. However, in patients with increased cranial pressure, the markedly depressant effect of propofol on systemic arterial pressure will dramatically decrease CPP. It does not affect cerebrovascular regulation or cerebral reactivity to carbon dioxide tension. Its neuroprotective qualities include EEG burst suppression similar to thiopental, anticonvulsive properties, the decrease of intraocular pressure, and free radical scavenging.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Propofol decreases the arterial blood pressure due to both a decrease in systemic vascular resistance and a decrease in preload (caused by inhibition of sympathetic tone and direct vascular smooth muscle effect). It also causes direct myocardial depression.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">Respiratory effects are dose dependent and include a shift of the CO<sub>2</sub> response curve to the right causing hypoventilation, hypercarbia, hypoxemia, and even apnea. Significant interpatient variability exists, and the dose required to induce any of these effects is unique to each patient. Propofol produces bronchodilation and is not an inhibitor of hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction.</p>
<p class="indent">Propofol has antipruritic and antiemetic properties; while not a first line agent, as little as 10 to 20&#x00A0;mg of propofol may reduce nausea and emesis in the perioperative patient. The same dose may also decrease pruritus associated with spinal opioids. Mechanisms for both are still not entirely understood.</p>
<a id="page174"></a>
<p class="indent">The anesthetic action of propofol is terminated by redistribution from the central lipophilic tissues of the brain to peripheral lean muscle compartments. Terminal metabolism primarily occurs hepatically; the inactive water-soluble metabolites are eliminated renally. However, the presence of even clinically significant hepatic and renal disease does not markedly change propofol pharmacokinetics.<sup><a href="ch009-sec03.xhtml#bib4">4</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">An egg allergy is not necessarily a contraindication to propofol. Most egg allergies involve egg albumin found in egg whites. The egg lecithin in the propofol emulsion is an egg yolk extract. Propofol must be handled with sterile technique as the emulsion can support bacterial growth. Unused propofol should be discarded 6 hours after opening. The use of long-term, high-dose infusion in critically ill children and adults may cause propofol infusion syndrome (PRIS) characterized by cardiac failure, rhabdomyolysis, metabolic acidosis, renal failure, hyperkalemia, hypertriglyceridemia, and hepatomegaly. PRIS is rare, and its pathophysiology is uncertain, but it is often fatal. If suspected, propofol must be immediately discontinued and an alternative sedative employed.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen116">C. Benzodiazepines</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Benzodiazepine compounds consist of a benzene ring and a diazepine ring. The most commonly used benzodiazepines in anesthetic practice are midazolam (Versed), lorazepam (Ativan), and diazepam (Valium). Midazolam is water soluble at low pH. Lorazepam and diazepam are insoluble and are formulated with propylene glycol; venoirritation is sometimes seen on administration.</p>
<p class="indent">Benzodiazepines bind to the same GABA<sub>A</sub> receptors as barbiturates but at a different site on the receptor. The frequency of the associated chloride ion channel opening is increased with binding of GABA to the receptor, causing sedation along the same downstream pathway as propofol and the barbiturates. Benzodiazepines similarly decrease CMRO<sub>2</sub>, CBF, and ICP. Although benzodiazepines are unable to completely suppress EEG bursts, they are effective in suppressing and controlling grand mal seizures.<sup><a href="ch009-sec03.xhtml#bib5">5</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Benzodiazepines display minimal cardiorespiratory depression except when large doses are administered or when synergistically administered with opioids. Used alone, they slightly decrease arterial blood pressure, cardiac output, and peripheral vascular resistance. Midazolam can cause vagolysis resulting in changes in heart rate. Other clinically significant adverse effects include paradoxical excitement, which may occur in up to 10% to 15% of patients.</p>
<p class="indent">Unlike propofol and the barbiturates, sedation with benzodiazepines can be pharmacologically reversed. Flumazenil is a specific competitive antagonist for benzodiazepines with a high affinity for the benzodiazepine receptor site. The dosage of flumazenil is 0.5 to 1&#x00A0;mg IV. It is cleared more rapidly than the benzodiazepines, so patients must continue to be monitored as resedation may occur and repeated doses of flumazenil may be required.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Unlike propofol and the barbiturates, sedation with benzodiazepines can be pharmacologically reversed with flumazenil, a specific competitive antagonist for benzodiazepines.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">Benzodiazepines are hepatically metabolized and are susceptible to hepatic dysfunction and the coadministration of other medications. Being highly protein bound, the free drug fraction is increased in severe liver disease and chronic kidney disease (CKD), with the elimination half-life being either prolonged or shortened, respectively. Hepatic clearance is enhanced if hepatic function is unaffected in the patient with CKD. Primary diazepam metabolites, desmethyldiazepam and 3-hydroxydiazepam, are pharmacologically active and prolong the sedative effects. These metabolites are further conjugated to form inactive water-soluble glucuronidated products. A conjugated<a id="page175"></a> midazolam metabolite, <em>&#x03B1;</em>-hydroxymidazolam, may also accumulate in patients with CKD receiving large doses of midazolam.<sup><a href="ch009-sec03.xhtml#bib5">5</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Although benzodiazepines are not known to be significant teratogens, there is concern that they may cause an increase in the incidence of cleft palate in susceptible patients. Newborns may exhibit withdrawal syndrome from benzodiazepines administered to the mother. Consequently, benzodiazepines are usually avoided during pregnancy.<sup><a href="ch009-sec03.xhtml#bib6">6</a></sup></p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen117">D. Etomidate</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Etomidate (Amidate) is structurally unrelated to other anesthetic agents. It has an imidazole ring that, under physiologic pH, makes it lipid soluble. It is a stereoisomer; only the R(+) isomer possesses clinical anesthetic activity. To allow for an injectable solution, the drug is dissolved in propylene glycol. This solution may cause pain on injection, which may be reduced by pre-IV injection of lidocaine.</p>
<p class="indent">Etomidate binds to GABA<sub>A</sub> receptors, increasing the receptors affinity for GABA, although etomidate appears to operate preferentially at GABA<sub>A</sub> receptors that express only a subset of the possible <em>&#x03B2;</em> subunits.<sup><a href="ch009-sec03.xhtml#bib7">7</a></sup> It is thought to cause subcortical disinhibition, explaining the involuntary myoclonic movements and even trismus commonly encountered during induction with this medication. It decreases CMRO<sub>2</sub>, CBF, and ICP, while maintaining good CPP secondary to hemodynamic stability. It is capable of producing convulsion-like EEG potentials in epileptic patients without creating actual convulsions, helping to localize seizure foci during intraoperative mapping.<sup><a href="ch009-sec03.xhtml#bib7">7</a></sup> This property makes it a good second-line agent for those in whom electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) failed with methohexital. Although etomidate may create these potentials, it has anticonvulsant properties and may be used against status epilepticus. Etomidate also increases the amplitude of somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEP) helping in situations where interpretation is needed and SSEP signal quality is poor.</p>
<p class="indent">Postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) are more common with etomidate than with other IV anesthetics, and it lacks any analgesic properties. Etomidate transiently inhibits 11-<em>&#x03B2;</em> hydroxylase, an enzyme involved in steroidogenesis, which causes adrenocortical suppression. Even after a single induction dose, suppression can be seen for up to 5 to 8 hours. Secondary to this deleterious effect, some practitioners caution against the use of even one dose of etomidate for certain patients (eg, those in septic shock). Additionally, patients with trauma receiving single-dose etomidate for rapid sequence induction (RSI) were found to have an increased risk of adrenal insufficiency and ultimately poorer outcomes compared to a similar group who did not receive etomidate.<sup><a href="ch009-sec03.xhtml#bib8">8</a></sup> These concerns have led to the decreased use of etomidate as part of RSI protocols set for patients with trauma at several institutions.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Etomidate transiently inhibits <strong><em>11-</em></strong><strong><em>&#x03B2;</em></strong><strong><em>-hydroxylase</em></strong>, an enzyme involved in the production of steroids, even after a single induction dose.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">In its favor, however, etomidate lacks histamine release and causes minimal hemodynamic depression and bronchoconstriction even in the presence of cardiovascular and pulmonary disease. It is this hemodynamic stability that underlies the continued use of etomidate in clinical practice. Awakening from etomidate occurs primarily by redistribution to peripheral tissues. Terminal elimination occurs by hepatic biotransformation, where it is broken down by plasma esterases to inactive metabolites that are then renally excreted.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen118">E. Ketamine</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Ketamine (Ketalar) is a phencyclidine derivative and is highly lipid soluble. In the United States, intravenous ketamine is sold as a racemic mixture of<a id="page176"></a> two enantiomers. Of these two forms, S(+)-ketamine is more potent than the R(&#x2212;)-stereoisomer and has a greater rate of clearance and faster recovery time.<sup><a href="ch009-sec03.xhtml#bib9">9</a></sup> Ketamine has several unique properties to distinguish it from other IV anesthetics: it stimulates the sympathetic nervous system, has minimal respiratory depression, and causes potent bronchodilation. Additionally, it has several routes of administration, making it an excellent choice for uncooperative patients and pediatrics. Although best characterized for its dissociative anesthetic properties, ketamine also exerts analgesic, anti-inflammatory, and antidepressant actions. Its major effects are mediated through its potent antagonism of the NMDA receptor, rather than the action at the GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor.</p>
<p class="indent">Ketamine is a cerebral vasodilator, causing increased CBF and increased ICP. It also increases CMRO<sub>2</sub>. It is relatively contraindicated in patients with space occupying lesions within the CNS, especially those with elevated ICP. Research has subsequently shown that normocapnia will blunt the undesirable effects of ketamine on increased CBF, but other induction agents are more appropriate and almost always available. Although ketamine causes myoclonus and increased EEG activity, it is still considered an anticonvulsant and may be used as a last-line agent in status epilepticus.</p>
<p class="indent">Secondary to its direct stimulation on the sympathetic nervous system, ketamine can cause an increase in heart rate and an increase in both systemic and pulmonary artery blood pressures. This causes increased cardiac work and myocardial oxygen consumption putting great demand on the heart. Its use is relatively contraindicated in patients with severe coronary artery disease or those with poor right ventricular heart function.</p>
<p class="indent">Ketamine has minimal effect on respiratory mechanics and upper airway reflexes. However, patients who are considered full stomachs are still at risk of aspiration and should be intubated during general anesthesia with ketamine. Ketamine causes increased lacrimation and salivation that may lead to laryngospasm. Pretreatment with an antisialagogue such as glycopyrrolate can attenuate this response. Unfortunately, ketamine tends to produce unpleasant emergence reactions, which (controversially) may be minimized with pretreatment of benzodiazepines.<sup><a href="ch009-sec03.xhtml#bib9">9</a></sup> Despite its side effect profile, ketamine&#x2019;s unique properties and its multiple documented routes of administration (IV, intramuscular [IM], oral, rectal, and even epidural and intrathecal) give it many adjunct clinical uses. Of note, although the bioavailability of ketamine is 100% following IV or IM injection, it is markedly decreased with oral or rectal administration secondary to first-pass effect, making these modes of drug administration less reliable. Ketamine also appears to be efficacious as a treatment for major depressive disorder with accompanying suicidal ideation, and is available as a nasal spray of S(+)-ketamine (Spravato) for this particular indication.</p>
<p class="indent">Termination of the clinical effect of ketamine is primarily due to redistribution from the brain to the peripheral tissues. Ketamine is hepatically metabolized by the CYP450 system into several metabolites of which one, norketamine, retains some anesthetic properties. Its metabolites are then renally excreted. Given its dependence on hepatic metabolism, infusion parameters or repeated doses should be reduced in patients with hepatic dysfunction. It may also have a direct detrimental impact on the interstitial cells of the bladder causing inflammatory cystitis after prolonged use.</p>
<p class="indent">Ketamine comes in concentrations of 10&#x00A0;mg/mL (1%), 50&#x00A0;mg/mL (5%), or 100&#x00A0;mg/mL (10%). When drawing up the medication, hypervigilance is critical so as not to confuse the more concentrated solution (ideal for IM injection)<a id="page177"></a> with the more dilute solution resulting in a potential overdose with IV injection. With that said, direct deaths caused by ketamine overdose (ie, without physical harm or hypothermia), in the absence of multidrug intoxication, are very rare. In fact, there has been no report involving a lethal dose of ketamine in humans. Most, if not all, side effects of ketamine are dose dependent, transient, and self-resolving.<sup><a href="ch009-sec03.xhtml#bib9">9</a></sup></p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen119">F. Dexmedetomidine</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Dexmedetomidine (Precedex) is the S-enantiomer of medetomidine and is a centrally acting, highly selective <em>&#x03B1;</em><sub>2</sub> agonist with a relatively long half-life of 2 hours. It produces sedation, anxiolysis, and analgesia without substantial respiratory depression.</p>
<p class="indent">Current evidence suggests a dose-dependent reduction of CBF. Mechanisms for such decrease may be due to direct vasoconstriction of the cerebral vasculature and indirectly via effects on the intrinsic neural pathways modulating vascular effects.<sup><a href="ch009-sec03.xhtml#bib10">10</a></sup> Decreases in CBF could be secondary to CMRO<sub>2</sub> reduction. However, all available evidence suggests that CMRO<sub>2</sub> remains unaffected by the use of dexmedetomidine. Unfortunately, no relevant data from human studies exist. Despite the reported neuroprotective effects of dexmedetomidine in models of ischemic brain injury, the possible uncoupling of CBF and CMRO<sub>2</sub> raises concerns that decreased CBF with unaltered CMRO<sub>2</sub> could prevent adequate cerebral oxygenation of brain tissue at risk for ischemic injury. Lastly, <em>&#x03B1;</em><sub>2</sub> agonists decrease ICP. This could be due to greater <em>&#x03B1;</em><sub>2</sub> vasoconstriction on the venous versus the arteriolar side of the cerebral vasculature as the venous compartment comprises most of the cerebral blood volume.<sup><a href="ch009-sec03.xhtml#bib10">10</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Dexmedetomidine has been associated with serious episodes of bradycardia, hypotension, sinus arrest, and transient hypertension. This hypertension often seen with rapid bolus is secondary to weak <em>&#x03B1;</em><sub>1</sub> peripheral vasoconstriction.<sup><a href="ch009-sec03.xhtml#bib11">11</a></sup> The hypertension is temporary and treatment is usually unnecessary. On the contrary, the more prolonged <em>&#x03B1;</em><sub>2</sub>-mediated hypotension and bradycardia are more likely to necessitate treatment. The preemptive use of anticholinergic agents to prevent bradycardia can be helpful. Unfortunately, even after cessation of the drug, the hypotensive and bradycardic effects can last for several hours. Extreme caution is advised when administering dexmedetomidine to patients with advanced heart block and/or severe ventricular dysfunction.</p>
<p class="indent">One of the most frequently cited advantages of dexmedetomidine is its lack of respiratory compromise. Yet, studies comparing dexmedetomidine to midazolam show similar incidences of respiratory complications. On the same note, in a study comparing the effects of dexmedetomidine to propofol, dexmedetomidine proved to have a similar effect to propofol on both hypoxic and hypercapnic regulation of breathing.<sup><a href="ch009-sec03.xhtml#bib12">12</a></sup> Lastly, dexmedetomidine can worsen respiratory obstruction in those patients with prior respiratory issues such as sleep apnea.</p>
<p class="indent">Dexmedetomidine induces a form of sedation resembling natural sleep from which the patient is easily and quickly aroused. It also reduces shivering, inhibits gastric emptying and gastrointestinal transit times, and reduces intraocular pressure.</p>
<p class="indent">The liver rapidly metabolizes dexmedetomidine through mechanisms involving CYP450 and glucuronidation. The drug is rapidly cleared, and metabolites are excreted via bile and urine. Renal or hepatic insufficiency may delay excretion of the metabolites.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>