<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec27">VII. Factors That Determine Diastolic Function</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen51">A. Heart Chambers</h5>
<p class="nonindent">In addition to its ability to eject blood during ventricular systole, pump performance of the heart is also dependent on its diastolic function&#x2014;the ability to fully and efficiently relax allowing for blood collection prior to ventricular contraction. The atria contribute to this process as thin-walled, low-pressure chambers that function more as large reservoir conduits, in contrast to their respective thick-walled, high-pressure ventricles that function as forward propelling pumps.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen52">B. Left Ventricular Response to Load</h5>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><em>Diastolic loading of the ventricle</em></strong> generally occurs by adding volume (preload) to the chamber or by increasing resistance (afterload) to outflow. The ventricle responds to load by lengthening its myocardial fibers, increasing wall stress, or both, thereby modulating ventricular relaxation, filling, and compliance. Because such changes in load are dynamic and occur frequently both in daily activities (eg, exercise) and in the perioperative setting (eg, blood loss, fluid resuscitation, volatile anesthetics), the ability of the ventricle to rapidly adjust to such changes and ultimately maintain cardiac output (termed <strong><em>homometric autoregulation</em></strong>) defines diastolic function.</p>
<p class="indent">For the LV, <strong><em>diastolic dysfunction</em></strong> occurs when the ventricle cannot rapidly adjust to increases in load, resulting in persistently elevated LV volumes<a id="page58"></a> or pressures that precipitate LV failure. Diastolic dysfunction occurs when LV relaxation or filling is impaired or when the LV becomes less compliant. This can occur as an isolated abnormality (with intact systolic function) or in association with systolic dysfunction.<sup><a href="ch003-sec10.xhtml#bib5">5</a></sup> Diastolic dysfunction is more common in the elderly and often associated with conditions that increase ventricular wall stiffness or afterload (eg, LV hypertrophy). Because prior knowledge of patients&#x2019; diastolic function can affect clinical management, an understanding of its assessment strategies is vital. Unfortunately, no single index of diastolic function completely characterizes this portion of the cardiac cycle or accurately predicts those at greatest risk of developing heart failure in response to changing load conditions. Thus, both invasive and noninvasive assessments of ventricular relaxation, filling, and compliance may be needed.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen53">C. Invasive Assessment of Diastolic Function</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Complete and rapid <strong><em>LV relaxation</em></strong> is necessary to facilitate efficient passive ventricular filling and maximize EDV during diastole. Because LV relaxation is an active, energy-dependent process involving dissociation of contractile proteins in myocardial cells, myocardial ischemia is a frequent cause of impaired LV relaxation. Thus, ischemia can impair cardiac output and precipitate CHF through both diastolic and systolic mechanisms. Invasive assessment of LV relaxation is performed during cardiac catheterization by directly measuring the time course of LV pressure decline (&#x2212;dP/dt) during the isovolumic relaxation period. The two most commonly calculated indices of LV relaxation from this method are the maximal rate of LV pressure reduction (smaller values of &#x2212;dP/dt indicate impaired LV relaxation) and the time constant of LV relaxation (prolonged time constants indicate impaired LV relaxation). Although these indices have prognostic value, noninvasive techniques have largely supplanted them.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen54">D. Noninvasive Assessment of Diastolic Function</h5>
<p class="nonindent">As noted earlier, P-V diagram analysis of the EDPVR by echocardiography is one common method for assessing LV compliance (<strong><a href="ch003-sec05.xhtml#ff3-8">Figures 3.8</a></strong> and <strong><a href="ch003-sec06.xhtml#ff3-9">3.9</a></strong>). Also, because the isovolumic relaxation period for the LV is defined as the portion of the cardiac cycle between when the aortic valve closes and the mitral valve opens (<strong><a href="ch003-sec02.xhtml#ff3-7">Figure 3.7</a></strong>), the length of this period is related to LV relaxation. Impaired LV relaxation results in a prolonged <strong><em>isovolumic relaxation time</em></strong> (IVRT). The IVRT can be measured by observing aortic and mitral valve closure by echocardiography and, in the absence of aortic or mitral valve disease, is inversely proportional to LV relaxation.</p>
<p class="indent">A second method of assessing LV relaxation uses Doppler echocardiographic measurement of blood flow velocities across the mitral valve. During diastole, two distinct flow patterns occur at this location: an early E peak associated with early LV filling and a later A peak corresponding to LA contraction. When LV relaxation is prolonged, the E wave deceleration time is prolonged, the A wave velocity is increased, and the ratio of these two flow velocities decreases (E/A&#x00A0;&#x003C;&#x00A0;1). As diastolic function worsens and LA pressures increase, the E wave velocities increase, first to an E/A ratio in the normal range (E/A&#x00A0;&#x003E;&#x00A0;1) and then to higher ratios (E/A&#x00A0;&#x003E;&#x00A0;2).<sup><a href="ch003-sec10.xhtml#bib6">6</a></sup></p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>