<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec54">VIII. The Nonvolatile Anesthetics</h4>
<p class="nonindent">The unique analgesic properties of nitrous oxide and xenon are mediated through inhibition of NMDA receptors. Through the same mechanism, these agents can also produce excitement and euphoria, hence they have a potential for abuse. Given their actions on NMDA receptors, they have been shown to have both neuroprotective as well as neurotoxic effects in animal models.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen108">A. Nitrous Oxide</h5>
<p class="nonindent">For many reasons, the clinical use of nitrous oxide is on the decline. First, because it is relatively weak (the MAC is 105%), it cannot be used as the sole anesthetic agent. Second, it can readily diffuse into closed air spaces such as the middle ear, bowel, cranial air sinuses, a pneumoperitoneum (eg, during laparoscopic procedures), a pneumothorax, and gas bubbles inserted during ocular surgery. This can result in either an increase in volume of the space (eg, distension of bowel) or an increase in pressure (eg, in the eye or middle ear). Third, it is associated with a high incidence of PONV when it is used for longer than 1 hour. Fourth, due to its interference with folate metabolism, it has the potential for toxic effects on the developing embryo. Nitrous oxide oxidizes the cobalt atom on vitamin B<sub>12</sub>, thereby irreversibly inhibiting the B<sub>12</sub>-dependent enzyme <strong><em>methionine synthetase</em></strong> and resulting in elevated levels of homocystine. This end product leads to endothelial dysfunction and oxidative stress and destabilizes arterial plaque. Prolonged administration of nitrous oxide, as for sedation in the intensive care unit, is associated with severe anemia. Finally, nitrous oxide, like CO<sub>2</sub>, causes ozone depletion in the upper atmosphere. Despite the declining use of nitrous oxide intraoperatively, the administration of a 50:50 mixture of oxygen and nitrous oxide (Entonox) remains useful for brief analgesia in pediatric dentistry, labor analgesia, burn dressing changes, and related procedures.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">All volatile anesthetic agents increase the incidence of postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) and the risk increases with the duration of exposure to the anesthetic. They should be avoided in patients at high risk of PONV.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen109">B. Xenon</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Xenon is a rare noble gas occurring naturally in air at 0.05&#x00A0;parts per million. Recently, there has been renewed interest in the use of xenon as an anesthetic gas. Xenon has several advantages when compared with not only nitrous oxide but also the potent volatile anesthetics. Xenon has rapid onset and offset of action due to its extremely low blood:gas partition coefficient (<strong><a href="ch008-sec01.xhtml#tt8-1">Table 8.1</a></strong>). Its effects on cardiovascular, neuronal, and respiratory systems are minimal, and it is not a trigger for malignant hyperthermia. Xenon also can be used in low concentrations for analgesia. This action is mediated through inhibition of <em>N</em>-methyl-<small>D</small>-aspartate receptors in the central nervous system. The only limitation to routine use of xenon is its cost. The gas exists at very low concentrations in our atmosphere, and there is a high cost associated with its extraction and recycling. New anesthetic systems are being developed that will allow use of xenon in small volumes and will recycle the gas after it is exhaled.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Shutting off the fresh gas flows (rather than shutting off the vaporizer) during intubation or airway instrumentation is the best approach to prevent operating room pollution with anesthetic gases and reduce wastage.</p>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>