<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec4"><a id="page6"></a>III. Intravenous Anesthetics and Regional Anesthesia</h4>
<p class="nonindent">In 1853, Alexander Wood administered intravenous morphine for the relief of neuralgia through a hollow needle of his invention. This extraordinary accomplishment allowed for the administration of intravenous agents for both anesthesia and analgesia.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen9">A. Intravenous Anesthesia</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Phenobarbital was the first drug to be used for the intravenous induction of anesthesia. It was synthesized in 1903 by Emil Fischer and Joseph von Mering. Because it was long acting, it caused prolonged periods of unconsciousness followed by slow emergence and as such was not an ideal anesthetic. However, its success in producing anesthesia and the promotion and study of intravenous anesthetics by men such as John Lundy opened new possibilities in anesthesia. In 1934, Ralph Waters (1883-1979) from the University of Wisconsin and John Lundy (1894-1973) from the Mayo Clinic administered thiopental (a potent short-acting barbiturate) as a successful intravenous induction agent. Lundy emphasized the approach, referred to as &#x201C;<strong><em>balanced anesthesia,</em></strong>&#x201D; that consisted of a combination of several anesthetic agents and strategies to produce unconsciousness, neuromuscular block, and analgesia. Through use of this approach, Lundy allowed for a safer and more complete administration of anesthesia. Thiopental&#x2019;s popularity led to the introduction of several other types of intravenous hypnotics including ketamine (1962), etomidate (1964), and propofol (1977). Since that time, other intravenous agents such as benzodiazepines and new opioids have been added to the specialty&#x2019;s armamentarium.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">The barbiturates were the first drugs to be administered intravenously for induction of anesthesia.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen10">B. Regional Anesthesia</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Cocaine, originally described by Carl Koller in 1884 as a local anesthetic, became a mainstay for regional anesthesia through the early 1900s. During this time period, various nerve and plexus blocks were described, as was the technique of spinal anesthesia, all using cocaine as a local anesthetic. However, early cases of regional anesthesia were not without incident. Adverse effects, including postdural puncture headache, vomiting, and cocaine&#x2019;s addictive quality, necessitated the development of local anesthetics such as procaine in 1905 and lidocaine in 1943, which were much safer.</p>
<p class="indent">Throughout the 1940s, advances continued in the field of regional anesthesia with the advent of continuous spinal anesthesia by William T. Lemmon in 1940 and Edward Tuohy&#x2019;s eponymous needle in 1944. Tuohy&#x2019;s modification of the spinal needle allowed a catheter to pass into the epidural space and administer doses of local anesthetics. From that point to the present, subarachnoid and epidural administration methods of local anesthetics and opioids are commonly employed for analgesia during labor and delivery as well as for managing postoperative pain. Innovations such as ultrasound imaging and nerve stimulators are now used to facilitate locating and identifying nerves, thus improving the quality of the block.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>