<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec9">II. Structures of the Lung</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen13">A. Thoracic Cavity and Pleura</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The lungs are contained within the bony thoracic cage, consisting of the 12 thoracic vertebrae, 12 rib pairs, and the sternum. The intercostal muscles lie between the ribs. The diaphragm makes up the inferior border of the thoracic cavity and the mediastinum separates the lungs medially.</p>
<p class="indent">Each lung weighs approximately 300 to 450&#x00A0;g. The right lung is slightly larger than the left. Fissures separate the right lung into three lobes and the left lung into two lobes. Each lung is composed of 10 segments, the anatomic divisions of which correspond to the branching of the proximal conducting airways. The lung parenchyma is invested by a layer of visceral pleura, which also covers the surfaces of the interlobar fissures. As this visceral layer is reflected upon itself at the level of the hilum and pulmonary ligament, it becomes the parietal pleura. This pleura covers the entirety of the thoracic cage and diaphragm. A 20-&#x03BC;m-thick fluid layer separates the two layers, allowing for the smooth movement of the lung against the thoracic cavity.<sup><a href="ch002-sec13.xhtml#bib1">1</a>-<a href="ch002-sec13.xhtml#bib3">3</a></sup></p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen14">B. Airways</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Immediately distal to the larynx begins the trachea. A series of C-shaped cartilaginous rings support the trachea anteriorly and laterally. The posterior, or membranous, portion of the trachea lacks this rigid support structure, thereby allowing flexibility for food boluses that traverse the esophagus.</p>
<p class="indent">At the distal end of the trachea is the carina, the first branch point in the respiratory tree, beyond which left and right main stem bronchi begin. The right main bronchus has a significantly less acute angle of branching. This &#x201C;straight shot&#x201D; allows for a less circuitous path for aspirated material and is the primary reason aspiration events occur more often in the right lung.</p>
<p class="indent">The right main stem bronchus then divides into the right upper lobe bronchus and bronchus intermedius. The bronchus intermedius divides almost immediately into the right middle and right lower lobe bronchi. The left main bronchus divides into the left upper and left lower lobe bronchi. It is at this lobar level that the cartilage rings are replaced proximally by platelike islands of cartilage within the wall of the airway.</p>
<p class="indent">Each lobar branch then further divides into segmental branches. The airways continue to divide for another 5 to 25 generations depending on their position within the lung. As branching progresses, the amount of cartilage contained within the wall continues to decrease. The point at which cartilage is totally absent from the airway wall is termed the <strong><em>terminal bronchiole</em></strong> and is the final conducting airway before reaching the functional unit of the lung known as the <strong><em>acinus</em></strong>.</p>
<p class="video"><video data-id="fIAebdWs" controls="controls" class="jwp-video" crossorigin="anonymous" style="width:100%; height:auto; width:320px; height:240px;">Browser issues</video></p>
<p class="video1" id="vid2-1"><strong>VIDEO 2.1</strong></p>
<p class="video2"><strong>Collateral Ventilation</strong></p>
<p class="indent">Each acinus comprises respiratory bronchioles, alveolar ducts, alveolar sacs, and grapelike clusters of alveoli. The alveolus serves as the main point of gas exchange between lung parenchyma and the pulmonary vasculature. Approximately 300 million alveoli are present in an average adult male. Each alveolus comprises type I cells, which form the majority of the epithelial surface of the alveolus, and type II cells, which produce surfactants and function as reserve precursor cells for type I cells.<sup><a href="ch002-sec13.xhtml#bib1">1</a>-<a href="ch002-sec13.xhtml#bib3">3</a></sup></p>
<a id="page13"></a>
<p class="video"><video data-id="i4vro1gr" controls="controls" class="jwp-video" crossorigin="anonymous" style="width:100%; height:auto; width:320px; height:240px;">Browser issues</video></p>
<p class="video1" id="vid2-2"><strong>VIDEO 2.2</strong></p>
<p class="video2"><strong>Alveolar Capillary Unit</strong></p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen15">C. Vasculature</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Within the pulmonary system, there exist two types of vascular supply. Bronchial circulation, which arises from the aorta and the intercostal arteries, supplies oxygenated blood to the tissues of the bronchi, visceral pleura, and pulmonary vasculature. It is not involved with alveolar gas exchange.</p>
<p class="indent">The second vascular supply is the pulmonary circulation, which delivers deoxygenated systemic blood to the pulmonary capillaries for interface with the alveoli. It is here that alveolar gas exchange occurs, allowing oxygen to be absorbed and carbon dioxide to be excreted. The newly oxygenated blood is then sent back into the systemic circulation for distribution to the rest of the body.</p>
<p class="indent">The pulmonary arterial trunk arises directly from the right ventricle. It very quickly bifurcates into the left and right main pulmonary arteries. These pulmonary arteries further divide into separate lobar arteries that enter the hilum of their respective lungs.</p>
<p class="indent">After entering the lung, the pulmonary vasculature divides along with its corresponding airway. They subdivide into arterioles and then finally into capillaries at the level of the alveolus. As one moves past the alveolus, the vessels become venules. These venules eventually coalesce into lobular veins, then further on to the four pulmonary veins, two each from left and right lung. These pulmonary veins drain into the left atrium, where the oxygenated blood is then circulated systemically until it returns to the right atrium and ventricle for recirculation through the pulmonary system. It should be noted that blood in the pulmonary arteries is typically deoxygenated and the pulmonary venous blood is oxygenated. This arrangement is opposite of the systemic circulation as the vascular nomenclature is based on the direction of blood flow in relation to the heart.<sup><a href="ch002-sec13.xhtml#bib1">1</a>,<a href="ch002-sec13.xhtml#bib2">2</a></sup></p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>