<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/jquery.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
<!--<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-1.10.2.min.js'></script>-->
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-migrate-1.2.1.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery.qtip.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/etext.js'></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec58"><a id="page178"></a>III. Clinical Use of IV Anesthetics</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen120">A. Use of IV Anesthetics as Induction Agents</h5>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>Barbiturates</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">The induction dose of thiopental is 3 to 5&#x00A0;mg/kg in adults, 5 to 6&#x00A0;mg/kg in children, and 6 to 8&#x00A0;mg/kg in infants. The induction of anesthesia occurs in less than 30 seconds, and spontaneous awakening from an induction dose occurs within 20 minutes. Occasionally, barbiturates are associated with a paradoxical reaction of restlessness, excitement, and delirium. Ironically, this effect can be reversed with oral or IV administration of caffeine.<sup><a href="#bib8">8</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">The induction dose of methohexital is 1 to 1.5&#x00A0;mg/kg in adults. At lower doses, methohexital can paradoxically increase or activate cortical EEG seizure discharge. It is with this property that methohexital became the IV anesthetic of choice for ECT as it both decreases seizure threshold and extends seizure duration. The latter is an important quality during ECT, as the duration of seizure has been linked to improved efficacy.<sup><a href="#bib3">3</a></sup> It is important to note that although methohexital is the drug of choice for ECT, it is ultimately an anticonvulsant medication and may adversely affect seizure production in patients with high seizure thresholds.</p>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>Propofol</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">The induction dose of propofol in adults is 1 to 2&#x00A0;mg/kg. Propofol causes decreased systemic arterial pressure on induction, due partially to direct action on vascular smooth muscle and blunting of the baroreceptor reflex. Since this effect is related to plasma concentration rather than effect site concentration, it may be possible to blunt the effect by administering the bolus more gradually or in divided doses. Of note, with an induction dose of propofol, some patients may exhibit excitatory motor activity or nonepileptic myoclonus.</p>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>Benzodiazepines</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">The induction dose of midazolam is 0.1 to 0.2&#x00A0;mg/kg IV. However, the prolonged recovery from induction with even short-acting benzodiazepines limits their usefulness as induction agents in routine clinical use.<sup><a href="#bib9">9</a></sup></p>
<h6 class="h6">Etomidate</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Etomidate has a very favorable hemodynamic profile on induction, with minimal depression in blood pressure. It is often the drug of choice for anesthetizing patients who have significant cardiovascular disease or for emergent situations in which the need to preserve hemodynamic stability takes precedence over etomidate&#x2019;s other notable drawbacks. Etomidate is only administered intravenously, and the induction dose for adults is 0.2 to 0.3&#x00A0;mg/kg. The onset is extremely rapid, at approximately one arm-to-brain circulation time. The myoclonus and trismus that may follow induction with etomidate can make initial attempts at ventilation and intubation difficult unless the induction is promptly accompanied with a neuromuscular blocker. Etomidate does not inhibit the sympathetic response to laryngoscopy and intubation unless combined with an analgesic.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Ketamine</h6>
<p class="nonindent">The induction dose of ketamine in adults is 1 to 2&#x00A0;mg/kg when administered intravenously. However, induction with ketamine via IM administration is frequently used when the patient is unable to tolerate placement of an IV line, such as pediatric patients, uncooperative patients, or patients with cognitive<a id="page179"></a> impairments. An IM injection of 4 to 6&#x00A0;mg/kg provides induction of an anesthetic state with maintained spontaneous ventilation, allowing for an IV to be placed and the further management of the patient to proceed. Ketamine&#x2019;s onset is less than 5 minutes when administered via IV or IM routes, with recovery time averaging 45 and 120 minutes. The duration of anesthesia after one induction dose is from 10 to 20 minutes; however, regaining baseline cognitive function may take an additional 60 to 90 minutes.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen121">B. Use of IV Drugs for Maintenance of Anesthesia</h5>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>Barbiturates</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">Barbiturates are widely used to improve brain relaxation during neurosurgery and may protect brain tissue from transient episodes of focal ischemia by decreasing CMRO<sub>2</sub>.<sup><a href="#bib2">2</a></sup> However, the dosing required to maintain EEG suppression is associated with prolonged awakening and delayed extubation. In general, the use of barbiturate infusions to maintain anesthesia is not recommended because the capacity of the body to redistribute barbiturates is relatively limited. Continuous administration of barbiturates rapidly causes the concentration of medication in the peripheral compartments to approach the concentration within the central compartment. Termination of the anesthetic effect then depends solely on terminal elimination, leading to a very prolonged context-sensitive half-time.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Propofol</h6>
<p class="nonindent">TIVA with propofol is commonly used to maintain a state of general anesthesia. Infusion rates range between 100 and 200&#x00A0;&#x03BC;g/kg/min but variability can exist, and vigilance with such techniques is key. Although a safe and effective technique, questions pertaining to cost-effectiveness have emerged. Schraag et al conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis comparing propofol versus inhalational agents. The study concluded that compared to volatile anesthetics, propofol had a lower risk of PONV, lower pain scores, decreased time in the postanesthesia care unit (PACU), and higher patient satisfaction.<sup><a href="#bib13">13</a></sup></p>
<h6 class="h6">Benzodiazepines</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Infusions rates for midazolam for maintaining hypnosis and amnesia are 0.25 to 1.0&#x00A0;&#x03BC;g/kg/min when also combined with an inhalational agent and/or opioid analgesic. Midazolam is the preferred benzodiazepine for continuous infusion due to the long context-sensitive half-lives of diazepam and lorazepam. However, infusions of benzodiazepines for anesthesia are associated with prolonged emergence and are typically used only in patients who are expected to remain intubated.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Etomidate</h6>
<p class="nonindent">When etomidate was introduced, its hemodynamic stability appeared to make it an appropriate choice for prolonged sedation&#x2014;unfortunately, it is now known to be unsafe for this indication. Etomidate potently inhibits steroid synthesis at the 11-<em>&#x03B2;</em> hydroxylase enzyme, and its use results in a significant increase in mortality in sedated ICU patients.<sup><a href="#bib7">7</a></sup> Maintenance infusions of etomidate are contraindicated.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Ketamine</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Although rarely used as the sole agent for maintenance of anesthesia, ketamine is often used during general anesthesia<a id="page180"></a> as an adjunct to provide postoperative analgesia. A subanalgesic infusion (3-5&#x00A0;&#x00B5;g/kg/min) during general anesthesia or a 0.5&#x00A0;mg/kg bolus dose during induction can be used in patients with opioid-resistant chronic pain in whom postoperative pain management is likely to be difficult. There is also evidence for antidepressant responses achieved at doses as low as 0.1&#x00A0;mg/kg with an infusion lasting as little as 5 minutes or given via IM injection. Additionally, the ability of ketamine to reduce proinflammatory cytokine levels may be of clinical relevance, given that elevated interleukin 6 levels have been associated with poor postoperative outcomes and increased trauma-induced hyperalgesia, which could be beneficial regarding chronic postoperative pain.<sup><a href="#bib9">9</a></sup> Lastly, like etomidate, ketamine is capable of increasing the amplitude of SSEP, helping in situations where interpretation is needed and SSEP signal quality is poor.</p>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>Dexmedetomidine</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">Like ketamine, dexmedetomidine has been used primarily as an adjunct to general anesthesia for patients who require alternative mechanisms of analgesia, either in the setting of preexisting opioid tolerance in patients with chronic pain or in order to reduce opioid administration in patients at risk of opioid-related postoperative respiratory depression such as in patients with morbid obesity or obstructive sleep apnea. Dexmedetomidine is run intravenously as an infusion, ranging from 0.3 to 0.7&#x00A0;&#x00B5;g/kg/h, and is usually stopped at the onset of closure. Additionally, to reduce the incidence of emergence delirium in pediatrics, 0.5&#x00A0;&#x00B5;g/kg of dexmedetomidine can be given toward the end of the case.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen122">C. Use of IV Anesthetics for Sedation</h5>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>Barbiturates</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">Propofol and modern benzodiazepines have largely supplanted the use of barbiturates for sedation. Nevertheless, a small 25 to 50&#x00A0;mg dose of thiopental can be very efficacious if it is necessary to premedicate a patient who is agitated or hostile. There is usually no pain on administration, unlike propofol, and there is usually no sense of the onset of sedation or of disinhibition, unlike midazolam.</p>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>Propofol</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">With its relatively quick on-and-off capabilities and favorable side effect profile, propofol is a popular medication for sedation. Propofol infusions, or intermittent bolus doses of comparable quantities of medication, are commonly used for moderate procedural sedation.</p>
<p class="video"><video data-id="pynheqoj" controls="controls" class="jwp-video" crossorigin="anonymous" style="width:100%; height:auto; width:320px; height:240px;">Browser issues</video></p>
<p class="video1" id="vid9-3"><strong>VIDEO 9.3</strong></p>
<p class="video2"><strong>Propofol Infusion Dosing</strong></p>
<p class="indent">Maintenance infusion rates for satisfactory sedation usually range between 25 and 75&#x00A0;&#x03BC;g/kg/min, although higher initial infusion rates may be required to establish a suitable concentration at the effect site if a small bolus (0.25-0.5&#x00A0;mg/kg) is not used prior to the start of infusion. Propofol exhibits respiratory depression in a dose-dependent fashion, a decrease in tidal volumes, and an increased respiratory rate. Inhibition of the hypoxic ventilatory drive and hypercarbic response is observed even at sedating doses of propofol. Nonetheless, with its minimal hangover effects and positive antiemetic properties, propofol is well suited to moderate procedural sedation.</p>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>Benzodiazepines</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">The multiple administration routes of benzodiazepines allow this class to be a key component in sedation. In addition to the IV route of administration, midazolam is routinely given orally to children, although this indication has never been Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved.</p>
<p class="indent">IM, intranasal, transbuccal, and sublingual routes are also possible. IM diazepam should be avoided due to unreliable absorption and pain. When primarily used as premedications and adjuvants, benzodiazepines are dose-dependent<a id="page181"></a> anxiolytics, sedatives, anterograde amnestics, anticonvulsants, and muscle relaxants. Midazolam dosing for anesthesia premedication is 0.02 to 0.04&#x00A0;mg/kg IV/IM in adults and 0.4 to 0.8&#x00A0;mg/kg PO in children. Midazolam can be used for procedural sedation with minimal risk of respiratory depression, though in practice a carefully titrated propofol infusion will produce both superior amnesia and a faster recovery. However, the availability of flumazenil to acutely reverse sedation with benzodiazepines can provide a margin of safety that is unavailable when using propofol. Consequently, midazolam may be preferred for sedation in the setting of a jeopardized airway, such as for an awake tracheostomy, because it can be pharmacologically reversed.</p>
<p class="video"><video data-id="2aLGB5KY" controls="controls" class="jwp-video" crossorigin="anonymous" style="width:100%; height:auto; width:320px; height:240px;">Browser issues</video></p>
<p class="video1" id="vid9-4"><strong>VIDEO 9.4</strong></p>
<p class="video2"><strong>Midazolam</strong></p>
<p class="indent">Of note, midazolam has a half-life of roughly 9 minutes. If additional boluses are administered prior to the time to peak effect, over titration may occur leading to hypoventilation, airway obstruction, hypoxia, and hypotension. Although midazolam has a wide margin of safety, repeated doses should only be given with this knowledge in mind to avoid such complications.<sup><a href="#bib12">12</a></sup></p>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>Ketamine</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">In addition to its analgesic properties, ketamine has a relatively high safety profile making it an excellent choice for sedation in certain patient populations. Administration begins with a small dose of 0.25 to 0.5&#x00A0;mg/kg, which is then followed by increments of 10 to 20&#x00A0;mg boluses, titrating to affect. It has an onset of 1 to 2 minutes and approximate duration of 20 to 60 minutes. It produces a dissociative state in which the patient appears conscious (eyes open, staring) but unresponsive to sensory input (pain, questioning). Although airway reflexes are maintained, increased oral secretions increase the risk of laryngospasm and an antisialagogue is often given preemptively. Perhaps the biggest side effect of ketamine is the vivid hallucinations, which (controversially) may be reduced with the use of benzodiazepines. Patient movement may make ketamine less than ideal for procedures requiring a completely motionless patient.</p>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>Ketofol</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">The combination of propofol and ketamine, nicknamed ketofol, is associated with a lower incidence of deleterious side effects than with each medication given alone. Reported advantages of the combination include hemodynamic stability, reduced nausea and vomiting, enhanced procedural conditions, analgesia, and less respiratory compromise. There is no consensus on the exact mixture for ketofol, and ratios of 1:1 to 1:10 of ketamine to propofol can be found in the literature with success. Studies reporting on the use of ketofol, however, should be interpreted and compared with caution as each study may use different ratios of each drug.</p>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>Dexmedetomidine</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">Dexmedetomidine sedation is most commonly administered intravenously as an infusion, ranging from 0.3 to 0.7&#x00A0;&#x00B5;g/kg/h. The rate is titrated based on sedation level and hemodynamic stability and can be preceded by a loading dose of 1&#x00A0;&#x00B5;g/kg given over 10 minutes. Some centers forgo the loading dose as it increases the risk of hemodynamic instability.</p>
<p class="indent">Dexmedetomidine induces a form of sedation resembling natural sleep from which the patient is easily and quickly aroused. With this, and the fact that it provides analgesia without causing significant respiratory depression, dexmedetomidine has become a favorable IV sedative. However, when compared with propofol, the target sedation level takes longer to achieve with dexmedetomidine (25 vs 10 minutes), and if loading doses are used, there is an increased risk of hemodynamic instability.</p>
<a id="page182"></a>
<p class="indent">Dexmedetomidine may have completely taken over the IV sedation world had it not been for its prolonged half-life (2 hours) and hemodynamic effects. Hypotension is the most frequently occurring adverse event and can last for several hours after cessation of the infusion. This can delay the release from PACU and ultimately lead to increased cost and patient dissatisfaction.</p>
<p class="indent">When used as the sole systemic medication, dexmedetomidine is a good choice of anesthetic for awake fiberoptic intubation (it even causes dry mouth!) or in combination with regional anesthesia. In the ICU, dexmedetomidine can be helpful for weaning intubated patients from the ventilator as it provides sedation with minimal respiratory depression. Compared to benzodiazepines in the ICU, dexmedetomidine is associated with a reduced incidence of delirium and a more physiologic sleep state.<sup><a href="#bib14">14</a></sup> Of note, dexmedetomidine has little FDA-approved indications. In fact, regarding sedation with dexmedetomidine of mechanically ventilated adults in the ICU, the FDA has only approved its use up to 24 hours. Additionally, although this medication is often used in the pediatric population, it still does not hold FDA approval for such use. More recently, dexmedetomidine did receive FDA approval for the use of sedation in the operating room.<sup><a href="#bib8">8</a></sup></p>
<p class="BIBLIOGRAPHYpTitle">References</p>
<ol class="ref"><li id="bib1">Felmlee MA, Morris ME, Mager DE. Mechanism-based pharmacodynamic modeling. <em>Methods Mol Biol</em>. 2012;929:583-600. doi:10.1007/978-1-62703-050-2_21. PMID: 23007443.</li>
<li id="bib2">Shapiro H. Barbiturates in brain ischaemia. <em>Br J Anaesth</em>. 1985;57(1):82-95. doi:10.1093/bja/57.1.82. PMID: 3881116.</li>
<li id="bib3">Qaisar S, Kholi A. <em>Methohexital</em>. In: <em>StatPearls [Internet]</em>. StatPearls Publishing; 2020.</li>
<li id="bib4">Walsh CT. Propofol: milk of amnesia. <em>Cell</em>. 2018;175(1):10-13. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2018.08.031. PMID: 30217361.</li>
<li id="bib5">Reves JG, Fragen RJ, Vinik HR, Greenblatt DJ. Midazolam. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 1985;<br/>62(3):310-324. doi:10.1097/00000542-198503000-00017</li>
<li id="bib6">Clinical management guidelines for obstetrician-gynecologists use of psychiatric medications during pregnancy and lactation. <em>Focus</em>. 2009;7(3):385-400. doi:10.1176/foc.7.3.foc385</li>
<li id="bib7">Vanlersberghe C, Camu F. Etomidate and other non-barbiturates. <em>Handb Exp Pharmacol</em>. 2008;(182):267-282. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-74806-9_13. PMID: 18175096.</li>
<li id="bib8">Tobias J, Leder M. Procedural sedation: a review of sedative agents, monitoring, and management of complications. <em>Saudi J Anaesth</em>. 2011;5(4):395-410. doi:10.4103/1658-354x.87270. PMID: 22144928.</li>
<li id="bib9">Zanos P, Moaddel R, Morris PJ, et al. Ketamine and ketamine metabolite pharmacology: insights into therapeutic mechanisms. <em>Pharmacol Rev</em>. 2018;70(3):621-660. doi:10.1124/pr.117.015198. PMID: 29945898.</li>
<li id="bib10">Tsaousi G, Bilotta F. Is dexmedetomidine a favorable agent for cerebral hemodynamics? <em>J Intensive Crit Care</em>. 2015;01(01):7. doi:10.21767/2471-8505.10007. PMID: 26955209.</li>
<li id="bib11">Keating GM, Hoy SM, Lyseng-Williamson KA. Dexmedetomidine: a guide to its use for sedation in the US. <em>Clin Drug Invest</em>. 2012;32(8):561-567. doi:10.1007/bf03261910. PMID: 22741747.</li>
<li id="bib12">Barends CR, Absalom AR, Struys MM. Drug selection for ambulatory procedural sedation. <em>Curr Opin Anaesthesiol</em>. 2018;31(6):673-678. doi:10.1097/aco.0000000000000652. PMID: 30124543.</li>
<li id="bib13">Schraag S, Pradelli L, Alsaleh AJO, et al. Propofol vs. inhalational agents to maintain general anaesthesia in ambulatory and in-patient surgery: a systematic review and meta-analysis. <em>BMC Anesthesiol</em>. 2018;18(1). doi:10.1186/s12871-018-0632-3. PMID: 30409186.</li>
<li id="bib14">Riker RR. Dexmedetomidine vs midazolam for sedation of critically ill patients: a randomized trial. <em>J Am Med Assoc</em>. 2009;301(5):489. doi:10.1001/jama.2009.56. PMID: 19188334.<a id="page183"></a></li></ol>
<a id="page184"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp9_1" onclick="openLinkInNewTab('https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_caf/09_IV_Anesthetics/story.html');">Infographic 9.1 A Closer Look at Propofol <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<a id="page185"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp9_2" onclick="openLinkInNewTab('https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/9_Intravenous_Anesthetics_and_Sedatives/index.html');">Interactive Video Lecture 9. Intravenous Anesthetics and Sedatives <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>