<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec67">V. Drug Interactions</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen160">A. Additive and Synergistic Effects</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Nondepolarizing NMBAs can have either additive or synergistic effects when combined. Usually, combining two chemically similar drugs with similar duration of action (eg, rocuronium and vecuronium) results in an additive potency and no effect on total duration. When drugs of different classes are combined (eg, cisatracurium and rocuronium), the effect in terms of total dose are synergistic and both potency and total duration are increased.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen161">B. Antagonism</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Adding depolarizing and nondepolarizing NMBAs results in mutual antagonism. For instance, defasciculating doses of a nondepolarizing NMBA prior to administration of SCh will increase the SCh dose requirement and shorten the SCh duration of action.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen162">C. Potentiation</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Inhalational anesthetic agents potentiate neuromuscular block (desflurane&#x00A0;&#x003E;&#x00A0;sevoflurane&#x00A0;&#x003E;&#x00A0;isoflurane&#x00A0;&#x003E;&#x00A0;nitrous oxide), likely by direct effects at the postjunctional receptors. Higher concentration (minimum alveolar concentration) and longer agent exposure will potentiate the neuromuscular block to a greater extent. The intravenous agent propofol has no effect on neuromuscular transmission. Local anesthetics potentiate the effects of both depolarizing and nondepolarizing NMBAs; the onset time is not significantly affected, but duration of action is prolonged.</p>
<p class="indent">The common antibiotics penicillin, cephalosporin, tetracycline, and erythromycin do not appreciably prolong the effects of NMBAs. Clindamycin and lincomycin do have pre- and postsynaptic effects, but at typical doses, they have no clinically noticeable effect on muscle blockade. Older antibiotics, such as streptomycin and neomycin, which are known to depress neuromuscular function, have more prominent but still limited effects. Hypercarbia, acidosis, and hypothermia, however, may potentiate the depressant effects of antibiotics in the critically ill. In patients receiving acute administration of anticonvulsants (phenytoin, carbamazepine), neuromuscular block is potentiated. Chronic administration significantly decreases the duration of action of aminosteroid but not benzylisoquinolinium compounds. Beta-receptor and calcium channel antagonists have insignificant effects on NMBAs, but ephedrine has been shown to speed the onset of rocuronium, likely as a result of its impact on cardiac output.</p>
<a id="page223"></a>
<p class="indent">Corticosteroids administered in conjunction with neuromuscular blockade, particularly in critically ill patients and for prolonged periods, markedly increase the risk of myopathy (up to 50% of mechanically ventilated patients who receive both drugs).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>