<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/jquery.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
<!--<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-1.10.2.min.js'></script>-->
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-migrate-1.2.1.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery.qtip.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/etext.js'></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec114">VII. Endocrine Response to Surgery</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Trauma, surgery, and psychological stress elicit a generalized activation of the neuroendocrine system.<sup><a href="#bib4">4</a>,<a href="#bib13">13</a></sup> Plasma levels of catecholamines, vasopressin, cortisol, and glucagon increase significantly. This leads to hypertension, tachycardia, fluid retention, and stress-induced hyperglycemia. Protein breakdown is significant after surgery and trauma. Concurrently, endogenous endorphins are released to counteract the stress response. Endorphins act at opioid receptors in the brain and spinal cord and modulate the body&#x2019;s response to pain. General anesthesia and regional anesthesia can blunt this stress response to a variable extent. Insulin resistance is seen for up 14&#x00A0;days following major surgery; therefore, diabetic patients may temporarily require higher doses of insulin compared to their preoperative regimens. Excellent pain control can also assist in blunting some aspects of the stress response.</p>
<a id="page400"></a>
<p class="BIBLIOGRAPHYpTitle">References</p>
<ol class="ref"><li id="bib1">Barret KE, Boitano S, Barman SM, et al. <em>Basic concepts of endocrine regulation</em>. In: <em>Ganong&#x2019;s Review of Medical Physiology</em>. 24th ed. McGraw-Hill; 2012:299-306.</li>
<li id="bib2">Russell TW. Endocrine disease. In: Hines RL, Marschall KE, eds. <em>Stoelting&#x2019;s Anesthesia and Co-existing Disease</em>. 6th ed. Elsevier; 2012:376-406.</li>
<li id="bib3">Robertson GL. Disorders of neurohypophysis. In: Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al, eds. <em>Harrison&#x2019;s Principles of Internal Medicine</em>. 20th ed. McGraw-Hill; 2018:2684-2692.</li>
<li id="bib4">Schwartz JJ, Akhtar S, Rosenbaum SH. Endocrine function. In: Barash PG, Cahalan MK, Cullen BF, et al, eds. <em>Clinical Anesthesia</em>. 8th ed. Wolters Kluwer; 2018:1327-1356.</li>
<li id="bib5">Felner EI, Umpierrez GE. <em>Endocrine Pathophysiology</em>. Wolters Kluwer Health/Lippincott Williams &#x0026; Wilkins; 2014:480.</li>
<li id="bib6">Molina PE. <em>Adrenal gland</em>. In: <em>Endocrine Physiology</em>. 4th ed. McGraw-Hill; 2013:49-72.</li>
<li id="bib7">White BA, Portfield SP. <em>The adrenal gland</em>. In: <em>Endocrine and Reproductive Physiology</em>. 4th ed. Elsevier; 2013:147-176.</li>
<li id="bib8">Coursin DE, Wood KE. Corticosteroid supplementation for adrenal insufficiency. <em>J Am Med Assoc</em>. 2002;287:236-240. PMID: 11779267.</li>
<li id="bib9">Liu MM, Reidy AB, Saatee S, Collard CD. <em>Perioperative steroid management: approaches based on current evidence</em>. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2017;127:166-172. doi:10.1097/ALN.0000000000001659</li>
<li id="bib10">Deegnan RJ, Furman WR. Cardiovascular manifestations of endocrine dysfunction. <em>J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth</em>. 2011;25:705-720. PMID: 21330154.</li>
<li id="bib11">Akhtar S. Anesthesia for the adult with pheochromocytoma. <em>UpToDate, Inc</em>. Updated May 07, 2020.</li>
<li id="bib12">Umpierrez G, Korytkowski M. Diabetic emergencies&#x2014;ketoacidosis, hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar state and hypoglycaemia. <em>Nat Rev Endocrinol</em>. 2016;12:222-232.</li>
<li id="bib13">Akhtar S, Barash PG, Inzucchi SE. Perioperative hyperglycemia: scientific principles, clinical applications. <em>Anes Analg</em>. 2010;110:478-497. PMID: 28121636.</li>
<li id="bib14">Powers AC, D&#x2019;Alessio D. Endocrine pancreas and pharmacotherapy of diabetes mellitus and hypoglycemia. In: Brunton LL, Hilal-Dandan R, Knollmann BC, eds. <em>Goodman and Gilman&#x2019;s the Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics</em>. 13th ed. McGraw-Hill; 2018:863-886.</li></ol>
<a id="page401"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp18_1" onclick="openLinkInNewTab('https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/18_Endocrine_Function/index.html');">Interactive Video Lecture 18. Endocrine Function <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>