<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec96">V. Preoperative Medication</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Several medications may be used prior to anesthetic induction to help reduce the patient&#x2019;s anxiety about anesthesia, improve conditions for intubation, reduce complications such as nausea and vomiting, and improve postoperative pain control.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen237">A. Benzodiazepines</h5>
<p class="nonindent">In many cases, patient education and informed consent conducted during the preanesthetic interview replace the need for pharmacologic anxiolysis prior to anesthetic induction. However, benzodiazepines are useful for producing moderate sedation and reducing anxiety, as well as providing some degree of anterograde amnesia and postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) prophylaxis. Midazolam is commonly used, owing to its rapid onset of action (1-2 minutes) and relatively short half-life (1-4 hours). It can be administered orally as a fluid or in a &#x201C;lollipop&#x201D; sponge as well as intravenously.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen238">B. Antihistamines</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Diphenhydramine is a histamine-1 antagonist that has sedative, antiemetic, and anticholinergic properties. Although still used in some conscious sedation protocols, it is rarely used as premedication, owing to its long half-life (3-6 hours), which tends to prolong recovery times. Diphenhydramine, along with <a id="page355"></a>a histamine-2 antagonist and steroids, may be given to patients with a history of latex allergy or chronic atopy or patients undergoing procedures requiring administration of radiocontrast dye as prophylaxis against allergic reactions.</p>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt16-15"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;16.15</span> Summary of Fasting Guidelines as Prophylaxis for Pulmonary Aspiration</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:50%;"></col>
<col style="width:50%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Ingested Substance</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Minimum Fasting Period (h)</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Clear liquids</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">2</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Breast milk</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">4</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Infant formula</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">6</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Nonhuman milk</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">6</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Light meal (toast, clear liquids)</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">6</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Heavy meal (fatty foods)</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">8</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">From ASA practice guidelines for preoperative fasting and the use of pharmacologic agents to reduce the risk of pulmonary aspiration: application to healthy ptients undergoing elective procedures. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2017;126(3):376-393.</p>
</div>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt16-16"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;16.16</span> Drugs Used to Reduce the Risk of Pulmonary Aspiration</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:25%;"></col>
<col style="width:25%;"></col>
<col style="width:25%;"></col>
<col style="width:25%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Drug</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Onset</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Effect</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Comment</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Antacids (eg, sodium citrate, aluminum or magnesium hydroxide, calcium carbonate)</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">15-30 min</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Raise gastric pH</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Nonparticulate antacids (sodium citrate) do not cause pulmonary damage if aspirated, in contrast to particulate antacids (calcium carbonate, aluminum hydroxide)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Histamine-2 receptor antagonists (eg, ranitidine, famotidine)</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">60 min</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Reduce gastric volume</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Increase gastric pH</p></td>
<td>&#x00A0;</td></tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Proton-pump inhibitors (eg, omeprazole, pantoprazole)</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">30 min</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Reduce gastric acid secretion</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Reduce gastric volume</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Block proton pump on gastric parietal cells</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Prokinetic agents (eg, metoclopramide)</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">15-30 min</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Increase gastric motility</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Increase gastroesophageal sphincter tone</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Useful for patients with known or suspected large gastric volume or delayed gastric emptying, such as obese patients, parturients, and diabetics</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Contraindicated in patients with a known bowel obstruction and should be used with caution in the elderly because they are more likely to experience side effects such as confusion and drowsiness</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen239">C. Antisialagogues</h5>
<p class="nonindent">It is often helpful to administer an anticholinergic agent to reduce upper airway secretions when a fiberoptic-assisted tracheal intubation is expected. Glycopyrrolate is a potent antisialagogue and produces less tachycardia compared to scopolamine or atropine. In addition, glycopyrrolate does not cross the blood-brain barrier; therefore, it does not have central nervous system side effects.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen240">D. Antiemetics</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The prophylactic administration of antiemetic agents is not a cost-effective strategy. However, selective premedication of patients with a history of PONV and those with risk factors for PONV (females, history of motion sickness, those likely to receive opioids, and those undergoing gynecologic, ophthalmologic, or cosmetic procedures) may be of benefit. Agents used for this purpose include serotonin antagonists such as ondansetron, phenothiazines such as perphenazine, butyrophenones such as droperidol, and antihistamines such as dimenhydrinate. Most of these drugs are best administered just prior to the end of surgery for optimal onset of action. However, the glucocorticoid dexamethasone is best given at the time of induction, and scopolamine, an anticholinergic drug, is routinely applied as a transdermal patch in the preoperative area. Scopolamine is especially useful in patients with a history of motion <a id="page356"></a>sickness. The neurokinin 1 receptor antagonist aprepitant is a representative from the newest class of antiemetics; like scopolamine, it is best given orally in the preoperative area.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen241">E. Preemptive Analgesia</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Preemptive analgesia involves the administration of analgesics prior to an expected noxious stimulus. This strategy may not only help improve acute postoperative pain control but also prevent central sensitization that contributes to the development of chronic postoperative pain. Examples of preemptive analgesia include the use of oral acetaminophen; NSAIDs; gabapentinoids; neuraxial techniques (with or without concomitant use of general anesthesia); infiltration with local anesthetics; and the administration of intravenous agents such as ketamine, local anesthetic, or opioids.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Skin flora such as <em>Staphylococcus aureus</em> and <em>Staphylococcus epidermidis</em> are the most common causes of SSI.</p>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>