<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec59">I. Brief History and Overview</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Analgesics are integral to perioperative anesthetic care and postoperative analgesia. As the number of patients consuming chronic opioids has increased in recent years, coupled with a global opioid epidemic, it is important to use a thoughtful and appropriate analgesic regimen for each patient. Resulting from the opioid epidemic, analgesic therapy is now focused on multimodal regimens instead of sole reliance on opioids. This chapter will review both opioid and nonopioid analgesics, including marijuana and tetrahydrocannabinol. Novel analgesics including ketamine, dextromethorphan, esmolol, and dexmedetomidine will also be discussed.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Aspirin irreversibly inhibits platelet aggregation for the life of the platelet, while other non-COX-2&#x2013;specific, NSAIDs reversibly inhibit aggregation in a dose-dependent manner until the drug is cleared from the circulation.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">Opioids, derived from natural opiates, have been documented as early as Sumerian times. Opioid formulations were used medicinally in 1500 <small>BC</small>. Opium was then transported across lands and crossed cultural boundaries. Morphine was first isolated in the early 1800s and has been the most studied opioid. With drug use came issues of abuse and addiction, and opioid addiction has flourished today.<sup><a href="ch010-sec04.xhtml#bib1">1</a></sup> The United States has a burgeoning national opioid epidemic.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>