<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec75">III. Local Anesthetic Pharmacokinetics</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Local anesthetics are most commonly delivered to extravascular tissue in close proximity to the intended target site. The resulting plasma concentration is influenced by the total dose of administered local anesthetic, the extent of systemic absorption, tissue redistribution, and the rate of elimination. Patient-specific factors such as age, cardiovascular and hepatic function, and plasma protein binding also influence subsequent plasma levels. An understanding of these factors should maximize the clinical application of local anesthetics, while minimizing potential complications associated with toxic systemic drug levels.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen179">A. Systemic Absorption</h5>
<p class="nonindent">In general, decreased systemic local anesthetic absorption provides a greater margin of safety in clinical practice. The rate and extent of systemic absorption are influenced by a number of factors, including total local anesthetic dose, site of administration, physiochemical properties of individual local anesthetics, and addition of vasoconstrictors (epinephrine). For any given site of administration, the greater the total dose of local anesthetic, the greater the extent of systemic absorption and peak plasma levels (<em>C</em><sub>max</sub>). Furthermore, an increased rate of absorption will also decrease the time to peak plasma levels (<em>T</em><sub>max</sub>). Within the clinical range of commonly used doses, the dose-response relationship is nearly linear and is relatively unaffected by anesthetic concentration or speed of injection. The extent of perineural tissue perfusion significantly influences systemic absorption, so that local anesthetic administration in highly perfused perineural tissues results in higher <em>C</em><sub>max</sub> and shorter <em>T</em><sub>max</sub>. Thus, the rate of systemic absorption from highest to lower is intrapleural&#x00A0;&#x003E;&#x00A0;intercostal&#x00A0;&#x003E;&#x00A0;caudal&#x00A0;&#x003E;&#x00A0;epidural&#x00A0;&#x003E;&#x00A0;brachial plexus&#x00A0;&#x003E;&#x00A0;sciatic/femoral&#x00A0;&#x003E;&#x00A0;and subcutaneous tissue. The rate of systemic absorption is also influenced by the physiochemical properties of the individual local anesthetic agents. In general, the more potent, lipid-soluble local anesthetics will result in decreased systemic absorption. The greater the lipid solubility, the more likely it will be<a id="page251"></a> sequestered in the lipid-rich compartments of both the axonal membrane and perineural tissues. The effects of epinephrine have been previously discussed and counteract the inherent vasodilator characteristics of most local anesthetics. The reduction in <em>C</em><sub>max</sub> associated with epinephrine is more pronounced for the less lipid-soluble local anesthetics, while increased neural and perineural tissue binding may be a greater determinant of systemic absorption with increased lipid solubility.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">The rate and extent of systemic local anesthetic absorption and, hence, the risk of local anesthetic systemic toxicity, are determined by the total anesthetic dose, the site of administration, physiochemical properties of the specific drug (eg, lipid solubility), and the addition of vasoconstrictors.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen180">B. Distribution</h5>
<p class="nonindent">After systemic absorption, local anesthetics are rapidly distributed throughout all body tissues and can be described by a two-compartment model (see <a href="ch007.xhtml">Chapter 7</a>). The pattern of distribution (and relative tissue concentration) is influenced by the perfusion, partition coefficient, and mass of specific tissue compartments. The highly perfused organs (brain, lung, heart, liver, and kidneys) are responsible for the initial rapid uptake (&#x03B1;-phase), which is followed by a slower redistribution (&#x03B2;-phase) to less perfused tissues (muscle and gut). In particular, the lung extracts significant amounts of local anesthetic. Consequently, <em>C</em><sub>max</sub> and the threshold for systemic toxic effects require much lower doses of local anesthetics following arterial injections compared with that for venous injections.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Allergic reactions to local anesthetics are rare but typically associated with either the breakdown product of aminoester metabolism (para-aminobenzoic acid) or the related compound methylparaben used as a preservative in some formulations of aminoamide local anesthetics.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen181">C. Elimination</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The chemical linkage determines the biotransformation and elimination of local anesthetics (see <strong><a href="ch012-sec03.xhtml#ff12-2">Figure 12.2</a></strong>). Aminoamides are metabolized in the liver by cytochrome P-450 enzymes via <em>N</em>-dealkylation and hydroxylation. Aminoamide metabolism is highly dependent on hepatic perfusion, hepatic extraction, and enzyme function. Therefore, local anesthetic clearance is decreased by conditions such as cirrhosis and congestive heart failure. Excretion of the aminoamide metabolites occurs by renal excretion, with &#x003C;5% of unmetabolized local anesthetic excreted by the kidney. Prilocaine is the only aminoamide local anesthetic that is hydrolyzed to o-toluidine, which can oxidize hemoglobin to methemoglobin in a dose-dependent fashion. Prilocaine doses as low as 8&#x00A0;mg/kg may be expected to produce sufficient methemoglobin levels to cause cyanosis (methemoglobinemia).</p>
<p class="indent">Aminoester local anesthetics are rapidly metabolized by plasma cholinesterase. Procaine and benzocaine are metabolized to <strong><em>para-aminobenzoic acid</em></strong> (PABA), which has been associated with rare anaphylactic reactions with the use of these local anesthetics. Patients with genetically abnormal plasma cholinesterase or those who are taking cholinesterase inhibitors have decreased aminoester metabolism. They would theoretically be at increased risk for systemic toxic effects, but clinical evidence is lacking.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen182">D. Clinical Pharmacokinetics</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The metabolism of local anesthetics is of significant clinical relevance as systemic toxicity (determined principally by <em>C</em><sub>max</sub>) depends on the balance between systemic absorption and elimination. Local anesthetics are largely bound to tissue and plasma proteins, yet systemic toxicity is related to the free (unbound) plasma concentration. Thus, plasma protein binding of local anesthetics reduces the free concentration in the systemic circulation and also reduces the risk of systemic toxicity. The extent of plasma protein binding is primarily dependent on the level of &#x03B1;<sub>1</sub>-acid glycoprotein and albumin, and it is also influenced by the pH of the plasma. Clinical conditions that decrease plasma proteins (cirrhosis, pregnancy, newborn status) decrease binding<a id="page252"></a> capacity and increase the risk of systemic toxicity. Furthermore, the percentage of protein binding decreases as the pH decreases. Thus, in the presence of acidosis (seizures, cardiac arrest, renal failure), the amount of unbound drug increases. Altered hepatic clearance may also influence the elimination of local anesthetics. For example, neonates have immature hepatic microsomal enzymes, leading to decreased elimination of aminoamide local anesthetics. Some medications such as beta-blockers, H<sub>2</sub> receptors, and fluvoxamine inhibit specific hepatic microsomal enzymes and may also contribute to decreased aminoamide local anesthetic metabolism. All of the previously described factors that influence systemic absorption, distribution, and patient-specific factors should be taken into account to minimize the risk for systemic toxicity. These factors form the basis for current recommendations of &#x201C;maximal doses&#x201D; of local anesthetics.<sup><a href="ch012-sec06.xhtml#bib7">7</a></sup></p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>