<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<section epub:type="chapter">
<div id="main_container">
<header><a id="page331"></a>
<h1 id="c16" class="chapter_name"><span class="chapter_name">16</span></h1>
<h2 class="chapter_title">Preoperative Evaluation and Management</h2>
<p class="author">Thomas R. Hickey and Natalie F. Holt</p>
</header>
<p class="nonindent">Preoperative evaluation of the patient by an anesthesiologist is a cornerstone of perioperative patient care. The main purpose is to obtain information about a patient&#x2019;s medical, surgical, and anesthetic history and to perform a focused physical examination that will help determine whether the patient is in optimum medical condition to proceed with the planned procedure. Increased efficiency can be achieved when need-based preoperative laboratory and other tests are ordered by an anesthesia provider in a dedicated preoperative evaluation clinic, rather than by surgeons or primary care doctors. Anesthesia preoperative clinics also enhance operating room efficiency by reducing day-of-surgery cancellations or delays due to incomplete workups.<sup><a href="ch016-sec06.xhtml#bib1">1</a>,<a href="ch016-sec06.xhtml#bib2">2</a></sup> Anesthesia preoperative clinics can alleviate patient anxiety by providing education and counseling, as well as reduce the risk of perioperative morbidity and mortality.<sup><a href="ch016-sec06.xhtml#bib3">3</a></sup></p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">The letter &#x201C;E&#x201D; after the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) physical status classification is used to indicate an emergency surgery. Emergency surgeries generally need to be performed within 6 hours in order to save life, limb, or vital organ. Emergency surgery is a risk factor for increased morbidity and mortality.</p>
</div>
</div>
</section>
</body>
</html>