<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec92">I. Approach to the Patient</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Key elements of the preanesthetic evaluation include a review of (1) the planned surgical procedure and its indication; (2) the patient&#x2019;s present and past medical history; (3) current medications and drug allergies; (4) social history, including use of alcohol, tobacco, or illicit drugs; (5) complications related to previous anesthetics; and (6) performance of a focused physical examination (<strong><a href="#tt16-1">Table 16.1</a></strong>). By convention, anesthesiologists use the ASA&#x2019;s physical status classification system to summarize the health status of the patient and communicate a risk assessment (<strong><a href="#tt16-2">Table 16.2</a></strong>).<sup><a href="ch016-sec06.xhtml#bib4">4</a></sup> Information obtained during the preoperative evaluation guides the development of anesthetic and postoperative pain management plans. Most preanesthetic clinics use standardized evaluation templates to guide patient evaluations; use of these forms also increases reporting consistency and limits the risk of missing information. Electronic health records also facilitate consistency in preanesthetic evaluation.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen226">A. Planned Surgery and Its Indication</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The planned surgical procedure is an important determinant of the type of anesthesia that will be required for the procedure and the expected level of postoperative pain. The planned procedure also dictates the anticipated patient positioning, duration, blood loss, and intraoperative and postoperative monitoring requirements. Procedures performed for urgent conditions (eg, small bowel obstruction, limb ischemia) are associated with an increased risk of perioperative morbidity and mortality.</p>
<a id="page332"></a>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt16-1"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;16.1</span> Components of the Preanesthetic Evaluation</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="U_TbRL1">I. Review of planned surgical procedure and its indication</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td2"><p class="U_TbRL1">II. Review of systems</p>
<p class="U_TbaL2">a. Head, ears, eyes, throat (glaucoma, dental care, implanted jewelry)</p>
<p class="U_TbaL2">b. Cardiovascular (exercise tolerance, angina, dyspnea on exertion, hypertension)</p>
<p class="U_TbaL2">c. Vascular (peripheral vascular, aneurysm)</p>
<p class="U_TbaL2">d. Pulmonary (smoking, COPD, asthma)</p>
<p class="U_TbaL2">e. Gastrointestinal (reflux, obstruction)</p>
<p class="U_TbaL2">f. Hepatic (liver disease, alcohol abuse)</p>
<p class="U_TbaL2">g. Endocrine (diabetes, thyroid disease)</p>
<p class="U_TbaL2">h. Renal (chronic kidney disease, dialysis)</p>
<p class="U_TbaL2">i. Genitourinary (benign prostatic hypertrophy, hematuria)</p>
<p class="U_TbaL2">j. Musculoskeletal (rheumatoid arthritis)</p>
<p class="U_TbaL2">k. Neurologic (neuropathy, stroke, seizure)</p>
<p class="U_TbaL2">l. Psychiatric (bipolar disorder, substance abuse)</p>
<p class="U_TbaL2">m. Other (dermatologic diseases, chronic pain, etc.)</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td3"><p class="U_TbRL1">III. Medication history</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td2"><p class="U_TbRL1">IV. Drug/latex allergies (including reactions, if known)</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td3"><p class="U_TbRL1">V. Social history</p>
<p class="U_TbaL2">a. Tobacco use&#x2014;past and present</p>
<p class="U_TbaL2">b. Alcohol use</p>
<p class="U_TbaL2">c. Illicit substance use</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td2"><p class="U_TbRL1">VI. Past surgeries and anesthetics (including complications, personal and familial)</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td3"><p class="U_TbRL1">VII. Physical examination</p>
<p class="U_TbaL2">a. Vital signs: blood pressure, heart rate, temperature, height, weight</p>
<p class="U_TbaL2">b. Heart</p>
<p class="U_TbaL2">c. Lungs</p>
<p class="U_TbaL2">d. Neurologic examination: peripheral neuropathies, asymmetries</p>
<p class="U_TbaL2">e. Airway: oral aperture, Mallampati score, dentition, thyromental distance, neck range of motion</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td2"><p class="U_TbRL1">VIII. Laboratory tests (blood, ECG, chest x-ray) as needed based on history and physical examination and planned surgical procedure</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; ECG, electrocardiogram.</p>
</div>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt16-2"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;16.2</span> American Society of Anesthesiologists&#x2019; (ASA) Physical Status Classification System</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<tr>
<td class="theadleft" colspan="2"><strong>ASA Physical Status Classification</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">1</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Normal healthy person</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">2</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Mild systemic disease that results in no functional limitation</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">3</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Severe systemic disease that results in functional limitation</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">4</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Severe systemic disease that causes a constant threat to life</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">5</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Moribund patient not expected to live without the planned surgery</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">6</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Brain-dead person whose organs are being removed for donation</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">E</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Qualifier used for emergency procedures</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">Modified from American Society of Anesthesiologists: new classification of physical status. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 1963;24:111.</p>
</div>
<a id="page333"></a>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen227">B. Present and Past Medical History</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Medical history is best addressed using a systems-based approach. A useful way to screen for occult cardiovascular disease is to estimate the patient&#x2019;s functional capacity. Functional capacity is described in terms of metabolic equivalents (METs), where 1 MET is the resting oxygen consumption of a 40-year-old, 70&#x00A0;kg man. A functional capacity less than 4 METs predicts increased perioperative cardiac and long-term risks. An example of an activity that uses about 4 METs is climbing one to two flights of stairs (<strong><a href="#tt16-3">Table 16.3</a></strong>). Instruments such as the Duke Activity Status Index (DASI) can also be used to assess functional status.</p>
<p class="indent">Pulmonary evaluation should take into account a history of asthma or recent upper respiratory infection (URI) and signs and symptoms suggestive of obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). Asthma or recent URI may predispose the patient to bronchospasm with airway instrumentation. OSA may signal difficulty with ventilation and suggest the need to use sedative drugs cautiously, as well as consider postoperative noninvasive positive pressure ventilation and a higher level of respiratory monitoring.</p>
<p class="indent">When an undiagnosed or uncontrolled medical condition is identified, the patient should be referred to a primary care practitioner for evaluation and management. Whether this workup needs to be completed prior to surgery is at the discretion of the anesthesiologist and surgeon and is often dependent on the urgency and invasiveness of the planned surgical procedure.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen228">C. Current Medications and Drug Allergies</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Review of current medications, including over-the-counter and herbal or complementary drugs, is an essential component of the preanesthetic assessment, as many drugs used in the perioperative period have important interactions with commonly prescribed pharmaceuticals. For example, patients who take monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) are at increased risk for serotonin syndrome if exposed to meperidine. Those who take gabapentin are especially sensitive to the sedative effects of opioids.</p>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt16-3"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;16.3</span> Metabolic Equivalents for Common Physical Activities</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:30%;"></col>
<col style="width:70%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Metabolic Equivalents</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Examples</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">1</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Watching television</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">|</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Eating, dressing</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">|</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Walking on level ground at 2-3 mph</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">&#x2228;</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Doing light housework (eg, dusting)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">4</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Climbing a flight of stairs</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">|</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Walking on level ground at 4 mph</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">&#x2228;</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Doing heavy chores (eg, scrubbing floors)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">&#x003E;10</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Playing strenuous sports (eg, tennis)</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">Adapted from Fleisher LA, Beckman JA, Brown KA, et al. American College of Cardiology American Heart Association Task Force on practice guidelines; American Society of Echocardiography. ACC/AHA 2007 guidelines on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and care for noncardiac surgery. <em>J Am Coll Cardiol</em>. 2007;50(17):e170.</p>
</div>
<a id="page334"></a>
<h6 class="h6">Cardiovascular Medications</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Patients on chronic <em>&#x03B2;</em>-blocker therapy should continue their medications perioperatively, as abrupt withdrawal may precipitate angina, ischemia, or dysrhythmias. Several randomized trials including the POISE-1 (Perioperative Ischemic Evaluation) and DECREASE (Dutch Echocardiographic Cardiac Risk Evaluation Applying Stress Echocardiography) trials have attempted to address the effect of initiation of <em>&#x03B2;</em>-blocker therapy prior to noncardiac surgery in patients with risk factors for cardiovascular complications.<sup><a href="ch016-sec06.xhtml#bib5">5</a>-<a href="ch016-sec06.xhtml#bib7">7</a></sup> A review of randomized trials on this subject found that while <em>&#x03B2;</em>-blockade was associated with a reduced risk of nonfatal myocardial infarction (MI), this came at the price of an increased risk of nonfatal stroke, hypotension, and bradycardia.<sup><a href="ch016-sec06.xhtml#bib8">8</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Patients who take centrally acting sympatholytics, such as clonidine, may experience rebound hypertension with abrupt discontinuation. Therefore, it is recommended that these drugs be continued in patients who take them chronically.</p>
<p class="indent">In various studies, calcium channel&#x2013;blocking drugs have been purported to reduce perioperative ischemia; conversely, they have been associated with an increased risk of surgical bleeding. However, none of these results have been substantiated in large randomized trials, and it is generally agreed that calcium channel blockers should be continued perioperatively. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor&#x2013;blocking drugs (ARBs) have been associated with refractory intraoperative hypotension. For this reason, they are generally discontinued the night prior to major surgery except for procedures with a very low risk of hemodynamic instability. There is some evidence to suggest that delay in reinstituting ACE inhibitor or ARB therapy postoperatively is associated with increased mortality. Therefore, preoperative medications should be resumed as soon as possible. Loop diuretics are also generally held on the day of major surgery to avoid intraoperative hypotension. Continuation of diuretics may be appropriate for patients with severe heart failure with frequent exacerbations.</p>
<p class="indent">Perioperative use of 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl-coenzyme A reductase inhibitors (known as statins) has been shown to reduce cardiovascular morbidity and mortality, especially for patients undergoing vascular surgery.<sup><a href="ch016-sec06.xhtml#bib9">9</a></sup> Therefore, it is recommended that statins be continued perioperatively. Furthermore, consideration should be given to initiating statin therapy in patients with cardiac risk factors who will be undergoing vascular surgery.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">The use of etomidate should be avoided in patients at risk for adrenal suppression, as it interferes with steroid synthesis and may precipitate an adrenal crisis.</p>
</div>
<h6 class="h6">Endocrine Medications</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Patients who take glucocorticoids should continue these medications perioperatively. The risk of clinically significant adrenal suppression in these patients is estimated based on steroid duration and dose. Patients who have been on a chronic dose equivalent to prednisone &#x2264;5&#x00A0;mg/d for &#x2264;3&#x00A0;weeks are at low risk of adrenal suppression; patients on &#x2265;20&#x00A0;mg/d for &#x2265;3&#x00A0;weeks are at high risk; and patients on intermediate doses are at unknown or intermediate risk. These patients can be evaluated with cosyntropin stimulation testing if time permits. Supplemental &#x201C;stress dose&#x201D; glucocorticoids are typically administered based on risk and the anticipated degree of surgical stress. <strong><a href="#tt16-4">Table 16.4</a></strong> summarizes an approach to glucocorticoid supplementation in patients on chronic steroids.</p>
<p class="indent">The management of patients with diabetes should be individualized. However, in general, oral hypoglycemic drugs and short-acting insulin preparations should be withheld on the morning of surgery. Metformin is associated <a id="page335"></a>with an increased risk of renal hypoperfusion and lactic acidosis in the context of severe dehydration; therefore, most clinicians discontinue its use a full 24 hours prior to major surgery and do not resume it until the patient is well hydrated.</p>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt16-4"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;16.4</span> An Approach to Perioperative Corticosteroid Coverage</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">For minor surgeries, take usual morning steroid dose. No supplementation is needed.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">For moderate surgeries, take usual morning steroid dose. Administer 50&#x00A0;mg hydrocortisone IV prior to induction and 25&#x00A0;mg IV every 8 h for 24 h.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">For major surgeries, take usual morning steroid dose. Administer 100&#x00A0;mg IV hydrocortisone IV prior to induction and 50&#x00A0;mg IV every 8 h for 24 h.</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">IV, intravenous.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">For patients on once-daily dosing of a long-acting insulin, 50% to 75% of the usual dose is usually advised on the night before and/or morning of surgery, depending on the patient&#x2019;s usual dosing regimen. For those who take intermediate-acting insulin, a 25% to 50% dose reduction the night prior and day of surgery is usually sufficient.</p>
<p class="indent">It is important to note that type 1 diabetics are dependent on insulin. For patients with insulin pumps, the basal infusion rate is typically continued. For those without insulin pumps, a low-dose insulin infusion along with glucose-containing intravenous fluids and routine capillary &#x201C;fingerstick&#x201D; glucose monitoring is appropriate. <strong><a href="#tt16-5">Table 16.5</a></strong> presents general guidelines for the perioperative management of oral hypoglycemic drugs and insulin in diabetic patients.</p>
<p class="indent">Women who take oral contraceptives, hormone replacement therapy, and selective estrogen receptor modulators (ie, tamoxifen) are at increased risk for venous thrombosis. Therefore, consideration should be given to discontinuing these medications 4&#x00A0;weeks preoperatively for surgeries associated with a high risk of venous thromboembolism.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">The manifestations of severe hypoglycemia can be masked during general anesthesia. While it is desirable to keep blood glucose at near-normal levels during anesthesia, the consequences of overtreatment with insulin are significant. Frequent perioperative measurement of blood glucose is essential. A target glucose between 140 and 180&#x00A0;mg/dL is recommended.</p>
</div>
<h6 class="h6">Psychotropic Medications</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Although many psychotropic medications have interactions with anesthetic and analgesic agents, most are continued in the perioperative period, owing to the potential consequences of withdrawing these agents in patients with serious mood disorders. Tricyclic antidepressants may cause QTc prolongation and are associated with anticholinergic effects that may be exacerbated by drugs used during anesthesia. Nonselective MAOIs, such as phenelzine and tranylcypromine, though rarely used today, pose a special concern in the context of anesthesia. They inhibit the breakdown of monoamine neurotransmitters including dopamine, serotonin, epinephrine, and norepinephrine. In patients taking MAOIs, coadministration of indirect-acting sympathomimetic agents such as ephedrine may cause a hypertensive crisis. In addition, concomitant administration of drugs with anticholinergic properties, such as meperidine and dextromethorphan, may cause <strong><em>serotonin syndrome,</em></strong> a condition marked by agitation, hyperthermia, and muscular rigidity and caused by an excess of serotonergic activity in the central nervous system. For these reasons, many providers will taper and discontinue MAOIs in the weeks prior to surgery, in conjunction with the patient&#x2019;s medication provider.</p>
<p class="indent">Mood-stabilizing agents, antipsychotics, antianxiety medications, and antiseizure drugs may be continued perioperatively. However, if patients are taking<a id="page336"></a> medications with a narrow therapeutic window, such as lithium and valproate, perioperative monitoring of drug blood levels may be appropriate, as drug absorption may be affected by surgery. Patients on lithium should have electrolyte and drug levels monitored, given the increased risk of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.</p>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt16-5"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;16.5</span> Guidelines for the Perioperative Management of Patients With Diabetes</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Schedule as the first case of the day to avoid prolonged fasting, if possible.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Hold oral hypoglycemic drugs and short-acting insulin on the day of surgery; hold metformin for 24 h prior to surgery.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Continue usual insulin regimen through the evening prior to surgery; if there is a history of hypoglycemia, consider reducing the nightly basal insulin dose.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">For patients with type 1 diabetes, administer half the usual morning dose of intermediate- or long-acting insulin on the day of surgery; for patients with an insulin pump, continue infusion at a basal rate. For long surgeries, pumps should be stopped and replaced with dextrose and insulin infusions.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">For patients with type 2 diabetes, administer 1/3-2/3 the usual morning dose of intermediate- or long-acting insulin on the day of surgery, depending on the patient&#x2019;s usual morning fasting blood glucose measurement. Hold short-acting insulin preparations.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Measure blood glucose level every 1-2 h during surgery.</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<h6 class="h6">Drugs Affecting Platelet Function</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Aspirin irreversibly inhibits the platelet cyclooxygenase (COX) enzyme, which is responsible for prostaglandin and thromboxane production. Among its many effects, aspirin inhibits platelet aggregation. For this reason, aspirin is widely used for prevention of clotting in patients at risk for cardiovascular disease, as well as those with a history of angina, myocardial infarction, stroke, and peripheral vascular disease. Daily aspirin therapy is also necessary for patients with coronary artery stents to prevent in-stent thrombosis. In the context of surgery, however, decreased platelet aggregation predisposes patients on aspirin to increased surgical bleeding. Therefore, decisions about perioperative aspirin use must weigh the risk of perioperative hemorrhage against that of cardiovascular complications. POISE-2 was a large randomized trial that found no difference in cardiovascular or mortality outcomes and an increased bleeding risk in patients who continued perioperative aspirin use.<sup><a href="ch016-sec06.xhtml#bib10">10</a></sup> It is generally agreed that aspirin should be withheld for 7 to 10&#x00A0;days prior to surgeries where bleeding would have catastrophic consequences (eg, intracranial, intraocular, middle ear, prostate, and intramedullary spine surgeries) or where the likelihood of major blood loss is high.</p>
<p class="indent">Platelet P2Y12 receptor blockers (eg, clopidogrel, prasugrel, ticagrelor, cangrelor) are another class of antiplatelet agents commonly used in patients following an ischemic cerebrovascular event (eg, acute myocardial infarction) or in patients who have undergone placement of coronary artery stents. Combined use of aspirin and a platelet P2Y12 receptor blocker (dual antiplatelet therapy, or DAPT) markedly reduces the risk of in-stent thrombosis in patients with vascular stents. The optimal duration of DAPT in these patients is unknown. The<a id="page337"></a> 2016 ACC/AHA Guideline Focused Update on Duration of Dual Antiplatelet Therapy in Patients with Coronary Artery Disease recommends that elective noncardiac surgery should be delayed for 30&#x00A0;days after bare-metal stent (BMS) and at least 3 but preferably 6&#x00A0;months after drug-eluting stent (DES) placement.<sup><a href="ch016-sec06.xhtml#bib11">11</a></sup> Clopidogrel, ticagrelor, and prasugrel should be stopped about 7&#x00A0;days before surgery. Cangrelor is a reversible P2Y12 receptor blocker available by infusion that is unique because of its rapid metabolism by plasma enzymes. Discontinuation of cangrelor for as little as 1 hour prior to surgery provides return to near-normal platelet function. Perioperative medical management in this population should be interdisciplinary, allowing both the cardiology and surgery teams to weigh in on the risks and benefits.</p>
<p class="indent">It is generally recommended that nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) be discontinued for 3 to 5&#x00A0;days preoperatively, owing to their effects on platelet aggregation. Patients are advised to use acetaminophen as the pain reliever of choice preoperatively, as it has no effect on platelet function.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Oral Anticoagulants</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Oral anticoagulants include warfarin, which blocks the production of vitamin K&#x2013;dependent clotting factors, direct thrombin inhibitors, such as dabigatran, and direct Xa inhibitors, such as rivaroxaban and apixaban. Indications for anticoagulant therapy include prevention of clots in patients with atrial fibrillation, prosthetic heart valves, or a history of arterial or venous thromboembolism. Perioperative interruption of anticoagulant therapy involves weighing the risk of thrombosis against the risk of bleeding. Interactive algorithms such as Thrombosis Canada<sup>a</sup> are useful in developing a perioperative anticoagulation management plan. The CHA2DS2-VASc risk stratification score is a way to estimate stroke risk in patients with atrial fibrillation.<sup><a href="ch016-sec06.xhtml#bib12">12</a></sup> It is also helpful in identifying high-risk patients in whom interruption of anticoagulant therapy would be most detrimental (<strong><a href="#tt16-6">Table 16.6</a></strong>).</p>
<p class="indent">Because its half-life is long, it is recommended that warfarin be stopped 5&#x00A0;days prior to elective surgery. Low-dose oral vitamin K may be used to accelerate normalization of international normalized ratio (INR) in patients on warfarin. When there is a desire to minimize the duration that the patient is without anticoagulation, bridging therapy may be used. This generally involves the subcutaneous administration of low-molecular-weight heparin beginning 3&#x00A0;days prior to surgery, with the last dose administered 24 hours before the start of the procedure. Bridging therapy is typically reserved for patients at high-risk for thrombosis, including those with a (1) history of stroke, thromboembolism, or coronary artery stent placement within 3&#x00A0;months; (2) presence of a mechanical aortic or mitral valve; and (3) atrial fibrillation with a CHA2DS2-VASc &#x003E; 5.</p>
<p class="indent">Dabigatran is used primarily to prevent stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation. Dabigatran is notable in that its half-life is about 12 hours in patients with normal renal function but more than 24 hours in patients with significant kidney disease. In patients with normal renal function, dabigatran should be stopped 2 to 4 days prior to surgery; in patients with a creatinine clearance of &#x003C;50&#x00A0;mL/min, it should be stopped 3 to 5&#x00A0;days prior to surgery. Rivaroxaban and apixaban are less dependent on renal function for clearance and may be stopped 2 to 3&#x00A0;days <a id="page338"></a>prior to surgery. Because of their relatively short half-life, bridging therapy is not usually required for the direct thrombin and factor Xa inhibitors.</p>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt16-6"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;16.6</span> CHA2DS2-VASc Score for Estimating Stroke, Transient Ischemic Attack, and Systemic Embolism Risk</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:50%;"></col>
<col style="width:50%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>CHA2DS2-VASc Risk Factor</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Points</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Congestive heart failure</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">+1</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Hypertension</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">+1</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Age 75&#x00A0;y or older</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">+2</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Diabetes mellitus</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">+1</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Previous stroke, transient ischemic attack, or thromboembolism</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">+2</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Vascular disease</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">+1</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Age 65-74 y</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">+1</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Female sex</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">+1</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="u_theadleft1"><strong>CHA2DS2-VASc Score</strong></td>
<td class="u_theadleft1"><strong>Stroke/Thromboembolism Event Rate at 1&#x00A0;y (%)</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">0</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">0.78</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">1</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">2.01</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">2</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">3.71</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">3</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">5.92</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">4</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">9.27</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">5</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">15.26</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">6</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">19.74</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">7</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">21.50</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">8</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">22.38</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">9</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">23.64</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">Adapted from Kirchhof P, Benussi S, Kotecha D, et al. 2016 ESC guidelines for the management of atrial fibrillation developed in collaboration with EACTS. <em>Europace</em>. 2016;18(11):1609-1678.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">In the past 10&#x00A0;years, there have been significant advances in the development of reversal agents directed at the novel oral anticoagulants (NOACs). Idarucizumab was the first U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)&#x2013;approved reversal agent of its kind. Idarucizumab is a specific reversal agent for the direct thrombin inhibitor dabigatran. It binds to dabigatran with 350 times the affinity of thrombin and then creates an irreversible complex with dabigatran that is eventually excreted by the kidneys. Andexanet alfa is the second NOAC reversal agent to be approved by the FDA. This drug has the ability to reverse the effects of all of factor Xa inhibitors as well as heparin. However, its official approved use is only for the reversal of rivaroxaban and apixaban. Ciraparantag is the latest drug in this category, being touted as a universal antidote to most of the oral anticoagulants and heparin. However, its use remains investigational. Although there is concern that these agents may increase the risk of thrombotic complications, so far this appears not to be the case.</p>
<a id="page339"></a>
<h6 class="h6">Antiplatelet and Anticoagulation Agents and Neuraxial Anesthesia</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Both the American Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain Therapy (ASRA) and the European Society of Anesthesiology (ESA) have developed guidelines for the management of antiplatelet and anticoagulant drugs in the context of neuraxial anesthesia.<sup><a href="ch016-sec06.xhtml#bib13">13</a></sup> It is important to note that not only the times of insertion but also manipulation and removal of a catheter from the epidural space constitute increased bleeding risks. Therefore, the timing of each should be carefully considered in the context of time since administration of the last dose of an anticoagulant or antiplatelet drug.</p>
<p class="indent">Neither NSAIDs nor aspirin therapy alone is believed to pose an increased risk of bleeding in patients undergoing neuraxial anesthesia. <strong><a href="#tt16-7">Table 16.7</a></strong> summarizes the recommendations of the ESA regarding the timing of neuraxial puncture or catheter manipulation/removal in patients on anticoagulant or antiplatelet medications.</p>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt16-7"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;16.7</span> Recommended Time Interval Between Neuraxial Puncture or Epidural Catheter Removal<sup>a</sup></strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:33%;"></col>
<col style="width:33%;"></col>
<col style="width:34%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Drug</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Time Before Puncture/Catheter Manipulation or Removal</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Time After Puncture/Catheter Manipulation or Removal</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Unfractionated heparin (for prophylaxis, &#x003C;15,000 IU/d)</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">4-6 h</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">PTT&#x003C;40 s</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">1 h</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Unfractionated heparin (for treatment)</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">4-6 h (IV)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">8-12 h (SC)</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">1 h</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Low-molecular-weight heparin (for prophylaxis)</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">12 h</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">4 h</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Low-molecular-weight heparin (for treatment)</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">24 h</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">4 h</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Rivaroxaban (for prophylaxis, 10&#x00A0;mg/d)</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">22-26 h</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">4-6 h</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Apixaban (for prophylaxis, 2.5&#x00A0;mg BID)</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">26-30 h</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">4-6 h</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Dabigatran (150-220&#x00A0;mg/d)</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">72 h</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">6 h</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Warfarin</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">INR &#x003C;1.5</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">After catheter removal</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Clopidogrel</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">7 d</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">After catheter removal</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Prasugrel</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">7-10&#x00A0;d</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">6 h after catheter removal</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Ticagrelor</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">5 d</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">6 h after catheter removal</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Ticlopidine</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">10&#x00A0;d</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">After catheter removal</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Aspirin</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">None</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">None</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">None</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">None</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">BID, two times a day; INR, international normalized ratio; IU, international units; IV, intravenous; PTT, prothrombin time; SC, subcutaneous.</p>
<p class="u_tfoot"><sup>a</sup>All time intervals refer to patients with normal renal function.</p>
<p class="u_tfoot">Note: No delay required in patients receiving only subcutaneous heparin for DVT prophylaxis.</p>
<p class="u_tfoot">Adapted from Gogarten W, Vandermeulen E, Van Aken H. Regional anaesthesia and antithrombotic agents: recommendations of the European Society of Anaesthesiology.</p>
<p class="u_tfoot"><em>Eur J Anaesthesiol</em>. 2010;27(12):1002.</p>
</div>
<a id="page340"></a>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Multimodal anesthesia is the cornerstone of minimizing postoperative reliance on opioids. This strategy involves the use of regional and neuraxial anesthetics, as well as nonopioid medications, including NSAIDs, ketamine, and gabapentin.</p>
</div>
<h6 class="h6">Opioids and Medications Used to Treat Addiction</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Patients who take opioids for chronic pain should continue these medications perioperatively and often benefit from a pain management plan that includes multimodal treatments such as intraoperative ketamine infusions, NSAIDs, acetaminophen, and regional anesthetic techniques. Patients recovering from opioid or alcohol addiction are sometimes prescribed partial opioid agonists, such as buprenorphine, or opioid antagonists such as naltrexone. These drugs are helpful in addiction recovery because they block the euphoric effects associated with opioid use; however, in the context of surgery, high doses limit the effectiveness of full opioid agonists. In the recent past, conventional wisdom supported the discontinuation of partial opioid agonists preoperatively for patients whose postoperative course was likely to require opioid therapy. However, more recent studies have demonstrated no adverse consequences from the continuation of these medications and a possible reduction in the risk of perioperative relapse and opioid withdrawal. A typical approach is to reduce the daily buprenorphine dose to 16&#x00A0;mg or less in the 48 to 72 hours prior to surgery.<sup><a href="ch016-sec06.xhtml#bib14">14</a>,<a href="ch016-sec06.xhtml#bib15">15</a></sup> Decisions regarding perioperative buprenorphine management should be made collaboratively with the prescribing provider.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Herbal or Complementary Supplements</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Owing to concerns about their purity and the potential for adverse effects, it is safest to advise that all herbal or complementary drugs be discontinued 1&#x00A0;week prior to surgery. Specific supplements have been associated with particular complications. For example, garlic, ginger, and ginseng may increase bleeding risk. <strong><a href="#tt16-8">Table 16.8</a></strong> summarizes the potential side effects of common herbal supplements.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Risk factors for latex allergy include neural tube defects, occupational exposure, as well as a history of atopy and allergies to foods, such as bananas, known to have allergens that cross-react with latex.</p>
</div>
<h6 class="h6">Drug Allergies</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Information about drug allergies should be elicited during the preanesthetic interview. It has been reported that 10% of the population reports a penicillin allergy; however, based on prior studies, up to 98% of these patients do not have a true penicillin allergy. Signs and symptoms suggestive of true type 1 immunoglobulin-E&#x2013;mediated allergy include urticaria, angioedema, and wheezing. Although the potential for cross-reactivity exists between allergy to penicillin and the cephalosporins because of the common <em>&#x03B2;</em>-lactam ring, only about 2% of patients with a documented penicillin allergy will have an allergic reaction to a cephalosporin.<sup><a href="ch016-sec06.xhtml#bib16">16</a>,<a href="ch016-sec06.xhtml#bib17">17</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Patients should also be asked about a history of allergy to latex, as this allergy requires advance preparation of the operating suite with latex-free equipment.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen229">D. Social History</h5>
<p class="nonindent">It is useful to inquire about tobacco, alcohol, and illicit drug habits, as patients who abuse these substances may be at risk of specific postoperative complications, including withdrawal. The CAGE questionnaire is a common method used to evaluate for potential alcohol problems (<strong><a href="#tt16-9">Table 16.9</a></strong>). A &#x201C;yes&#x201D; response to any of the CAGE questions is a marker of potentially problematic drinking. Abrupt alcohol cessation in patients who screen positive by the CAGE questionnaire may trigger alcohol withdrawal syndrome, which is manifested by agitation, hypertension, and tachycardia, and if untreated, carries a mortality of up to 15%.</p>
<p class="indent">Smoking is associated with an increased risk of perioperative respiratory complications, including airway hyperreactivity, and impaired wound healing. <a id="page341"></a>While greater than 8&#x00A0;weeks of abstinence is ideal, all smokers should be encouraged to quit smoking. It has been shown that patients who quit smoking in the context of an acute medical event (eg, acute myocardial infarction) have high 1-year abstinence rates compared to those who quit without such a context. As a result, it is widely considered that the preoperative period should serve as a &#x201C;teachable moment,&#x201D; and anesthesiologists should encourage patients to quit smoking as part of a program of preanesthetic optimization.</p>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt16-8"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;16.8</span> Perioperative Effects of Common Herbal Supplements</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:25%;"></col>
<col style="width:75%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Name</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Perioperative Effects</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Echinacea</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Hepatotoxicity; allergic reactions</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Ephedra</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Enhanced sympathomimetic effects with other sympathomimetic agents, dysrhythmias</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Feverfew</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Inhibits platelet activity</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Garlic</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Inhibits platelet aggregation</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Ginkgo</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Inhibits platelet-activating factor</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Ginseng</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Hypoglycemia; inhibits platelet aggregation and coagulation cascade</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Goldenseal</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Inhibits cytochrome P450 enzymes, which may cause changes in blood concentration of other prescribed drugs; may increase bleeding risk</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Kava</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Hepatotoxicity, decreased MAC</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Licorice</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Increased blood pressure, hypokalemia</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">St. John&#x2019;s wort</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Inhibits serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine reuptake; induction of cytochrome P450 enzyme, leading to increased drug metabolism</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Vitamin E</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Increased bleeding when taken with other anticoagulant or antithrombotic medications</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">MAC, minimum alveolar concentration.</p>
<p class="u_tfoot">Derived from ASA Physician Brochure. <em>What You Should Know About Your Patients&#x2019; Use of Herbal Medicines and Other Dietary Supplements</em>. 2003. <a href="http://www.asahq.org">www.asahq.org</a>. <a href="https://ecommerce.asahq.org/p-147-what-you-should-know-about-herbal-and-dietary-supplement-use-and-anesthesia.aspx">https://ecommerce.asahq.org/p-147-what-you-should-know-about-herbal-and-dietary-supplement-use-and-anesthesia.aspx</a></p>
</div>
<p class="indent">If substance abuse is known or strongly suspected, associated diseases and end-organ damage may be further investigated. However, a positive urine drug screen only confirms the presence of recent not active substance abuse, and the significance of this information for determining whether anesthesia can be administered safely remains controversial.</p>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt16-9"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;16.9</span> CAGE Questionnaire for the Evaluation of Problem Alcohol Use</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Have you ever felt you needed to <strong>C</strong>ut down on your drinking?</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Have people <strong>A</strong>nnoyed you by criticizing your drinking?</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Have you ever felt <strong>G</strong>uilty about drinking?</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Have you ever felt you needed a drink first thing in the morning (<strong>E</strong>ye-opener) to steady your nerves or to get rid of a hangover?</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">Adapted from Ewing JA. Detecting alcoholism: the CAGE questionnaire. <em>J Am Med Assoc</em>. 1984;252:1905-1907.</p>
</div>
<a id="page342"></a>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen230">E. Response to Prior Anesthetics</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The preanesthetic interview should include a discussion of any personal or familial history of complications related to anesthesia. Patients should be queried about a history of difficult tracheal intubation, prolonged postoperative nausea or vomiting, difficulty associated with the administration of neuraxial anesthesia, and so forth. <strong><em>Malignant hyperthermia</em></strong> is a rare but potentially life-threatening anesthetic-triggered disorder of skeletal muscle metabolism that is often inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. Patients may relate a personal or family history of high fever after surgery requiring hospitalization. Patients heterozygous or homozygous for the atypical plasma cholinesterase gene may describe prolonged hospital stays or ventilator dependence after brief surgical procedures. Advanced planning for these patients is a must; and suspicion or confirmation of these conditions should be flagged in the patient&#x2019;s medical record.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen231">F. Focused Physical Examination</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Components of the physical examination of main interest to the anesthesiologist involve the neurologic system, heart, lungs, and airway. Notation of blood pressure and heart rate is useful in screening for undiagnosed or poorly treated hypertension. Auscultation of the heart may reveal murmurs suggestive of cardiac valve abnormalities that may require further workup prior to surgery. Wheezing, rhonchi, or other abnormal lung sounds may require additional workup or indicate patients who may benefit from pretreatment with bronchodilators or steroids. In patients with a history of congestive heart failure, wheezing may also be indicative of decompensation. It is also important to note preexisting neuropathies, central nervous system deficits, and skeletal muscle weakness, as these affect the ability to position patients intraoperatively and may affect the decision to perform neuraxial or regional blockades. Examination of peripheral veins and pulses informs the plan for obtaining vascular access.</p>
<p class="video"><video data-id="EK1HcurI" controls="controls" class="jwp-video" crossorigin="anonymous" style="width:100%; height:auto; width:320px; height:240px;">Browser issues</video></p>
<p class="video1" id="vid16-1"><strong>VIDEO 16.1</strong></p>
<p class="video2"><strong>Airway Examination</strong></p>
<p class="indent">Evaluation of the neck and oral airway helps to determine the potential for difficult ventilation or tracheal intubation and, therefore, the preferred method of and desired equipment for perioperative airway management. Basic components of the airway examination include measurement of the oral aperture, Mallampati score, thyromental distance, range of neck motion, as well as examination of dentition and neck circumference. The <strong><em>Mallampati score</em></strong> evaluates the size of the tongue in relation to the oral cavity, and the test is performed by having the patient protrude the tongue while keeping his or her head in a neutral position.<sup><a href="ch016-sec06.xhtml#bib18">18</a></sup> The anesthesiologist then grades the view on a 4-point scale based on visualization of the uvula and the soft and hard palate (<strong><a href="#tt16-10">Table 16.10</a></strong>). Thyromental distance is measured from the tip of the chin (mentum) to the thyroid cartilage, while the patient&#x2019;s head is maximally extended. A thyromental distance less than 6&#x00A0;cm is suggestive of possible difficult intubation. The patient should also be asked to extend the neck as far as possible (normal is 35&#x00B0;). Significant limitation of neck extension is also a risk factor for difficult intubation. Inability of the lower incisors to extend to reach the upper lip (upper lip bite test) is also a predictor of difficult airway. Preoperative evaluation of dentition is important to determine the presence of prosthetics that should be removed prior to anesthesia and to identify preexisting loose, chipped, or fractured teeth that might later be erroneously attributed to airway manipulation.</p>
<a id="page343"></a>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt16-10"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;16.10</span> Modified Mallampati Airway Classification</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:30%;"></col>
<col style="width:70%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Class</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Direct Visualization</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">I</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Soft palate, uvula, tonsillar pillars</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">II</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Soft palate, upper portion of the uvula</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">III</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Soft palate</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">IV</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Only hard palate</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">Adapted from Mallampati RS, Gatt SP, Gugino LD, et al. A clinical sign to predict difficult tracheal intubation. A prospective study. <em>Can Anaesth Soc J</em>. 1985;32:429.</p>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>