<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec79">II. Sympathomimetics</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen195">A. Ephedrine</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Ephedrine is a sympathomimetic drug that exerts direct and indirect actions on adrenoceptors. Transport of ephedrine into <em>&#x03B1;</em><sub>1</sub>- and <em>&#x03B2;</em><sub>1</sub>-adrenoceptor presynaptic terminals displaces norepinephrine from the synaptic vesicles, the latter of which is then released to activate the corresponding postsynaptic receptors to cause arterial and venous vasoconstriction and increased myocardial contractility, respectively. This indirect effect is the ephedrine&#x2019;s predominant<a id="page272"></a> pharmacological effect, but the drug also directly stimulates <em>&#x03B2;</em><sub>2</sub>-adrenoceptors, thereby limiting increases in arterial pressure resulting from <em>&#x03B1;</em><sub>1</sub>-adrenoceptor activation. In this regard, ephedrine&#x2019;s initial cardiovascular effects resemble those of epinephrine because dose-related increases in heart rate, cardiac output, and systemic vascular resistance are observed. However, tachyphylaxis to the hemodynamic effects of ephedrine occurs with repetitive administration of the drug because presynaptic stores of norepinephrine are rapidly depleted. This tachyphylaxis is not observed with epinephrine because the catecholamine acts directly on <em>&#x03B1;</em>1- and <em>&#x03B2;</em>-adrenoceptors independent of indirect stimulation of norepinephrine release. Notably, drugs that block the ephedrine uptake into adrenergic nerves (eg, cocaine) and those that deplete norepinephrine reserves (eg, reserpine) predictably attenuate ephedrine&#x2019;s cardiovascular effects. Ephedrine is most often used as an intravenous bolus to treat acute hypotension accompanied by decreases in heart rate.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen196">B. Phenylephrine</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The chemical structure of phenylephrine is very similar to epinephrine, but the sympathomimetic drug lacks the hydroxyl moiety that is present on the phenyl ring of the endogenous catecholamine. As a result of this minor modification, phenylephrine almost exclusively stimulates <em>&#x03B1;</em><sub>1</sub>-adrenoceptors to produce vasoconstriction while exerting little or no effect on <em>&#x03B2;</em>-adrenoceptors except when large doses are administered. Unlike ephedrine, phenylephrine is not dependent on presynaptic norepinephrine displacement and, instead, acts directly on the <em>&#x03B1;</em><sub>1</sub>-adrenoceptor to produce its cardiovascular effects. Phenylephrine constricts venous capacitance vessels and causes cutaneous, skeletal muscle, splanchnic, and renal vasoconstriction to increase preload and afterload, respectively. These actions produce dose-related increases in arterial pressure. Decreases in heart rate mediated by baroreceptor reflex activation also occur. Cardiac output remains relatively constant when normal LV systolic and diastolic functions are present, but cardiac output may fall when LV function is compromised because failing myocardium is more sensitive to increases in afterload. Phenylephrine causes pulmonary arterial vasoconstriction and increases pulmonary artery pressures. Intravenous boluses or infusions of phenylephrine are most often used intraoperatively for short-term treatment of hypotension resulting from vasodilation. Unlike catecholamines, phenylephrine is not arrhythmogenic.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Phenylephrine stimulates <em>&#x03B1;</em><sub>1</sub>-adrenoreceptors almost exclusively and has little or no effect on <em>&#x03B2;</em>-adrenoreceptors.</p>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>