<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec115">I. Purpose/Goals of an Anesthetic</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen288">A. What Is Anesthesia?</h5>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><em>General anesthesia</em></strong> is a process whereby the patient is rendered unconscious and immobile in a reversible, controlled manner. Anesthetics induce unconsciousness by binding to specific receptors throughout the brain, brainstem, and spinal cord. Emerging evidence suggests that anesthetics interrupt the neural networks that underlie consciousness. General anesthetics also produce <strong><em>immobility</em></strong>. Although anesthetics most likely make patients unconscious by acting on the brain, immobility appears to result from effects on the brainstem.</p>
<p class="indent">Some operations require skeletal muscle relaxation. Complete muscle paralysis can produce immobility in response to surgical stimulation, although paralysis without unconsciousness can lead to awareness with recall, an uncommon but potentially horrifying complication. In addition, muscle relaxation provides optimal conditions for endotracheal intubation and improves surgical exposure during intra-abdominal and intrathoracic procedures. Although a patient may not move, the body can mount a robust <strong><em>sympathetic response</em></strong> to surgical stimulation with hypertension, tachycardia, and tachypnea. The last element of general anesthesia aims at controlling these changes. Some drugs provide all of the elements of anesthesia, while others have more specific roles. <strong><a href="ch019-sec02.xhtml#tt19-2">Table 19.2</a></strong> shows the actions of some commonly used anesthetic drugs.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Anesthetics most likely produce unconsciousness by acting on the brain. However, immobility appears to result from their effects on the brainstem.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen289">B. Who Gives Anesthesia?</h5>
<p class="nonindent">There are a variety of medical professionals who will be encountered on an anesthesia rotation (<strong><a href="ch019-sec02.xhtml#tt19-3">Table 19.3</a></strong>). These people are known as <strong><em>qualified anesthesia care providers</em></strong><em>.</em> They have different backgrounds and training and may work alone or as part of an anesthesia care team.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen290">C. What Are the Risks of Anesthesia?</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Most anesthesia consent forms include a list of possible complications. Some of these, such as sore throat and postoperative nausea or vomiting, are common but transient. Others, such as dental damage or corneal abrasion, are<a id="page403"></a> less common but self-limited or repairable. A few, including awareness, brain damage, or death, are rare but catastrophic. About 1 in 10,000 patients will have awareness during anesthesia. Patients with a previous episode of <strong><em>awareness</em></strong> with recall are at increased risk of this complication after a subsequent anesthetic.<sup><a href="ch019-sec05.xhtml#bib1">1</a></sup> Death solely due to anesthesia is very rare, occurring in approximately 1 in 250,000 healthy patients but rising to 1 in 10,000 to 15,000 in patients with comorbidities.<sup><a href="ch019-sec05.xhtml#bib2">2</a></sup></p>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt19-1"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;19.1</span> Common Anesthesia-Related Terms and Acronyms</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:30%;"></col>
<col style="width:70%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Term/Acronym</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Definition</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">MAC</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Minimum alveolar concentration: The concentration of inhaled anesthetic that will keep half the patients immobile in response to surgical stimulation. Ninety-five percent of patients will be immobilized at 1.3 MAC.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">MAC</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Monitored anesthesia care: Monitoring plus varying amounts of sedation</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">TIVA</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Total intravenous anesthesia</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">GA</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">General anesthesia</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Reversal</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">A combination of anticholinesterase and anticholinergic drugs used to terminate the effect of certain paralytic drugs</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">LMA</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Laryngeal mask airway</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">ET tube</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Endotracheal tube</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">TOF</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Train-of-four: a measurement of the degree of neuromuscular blockade</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">PACU</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Postanesthesia care unit (or recovery room)</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Awareness during anesthesia is rare, occurring in about 1 in 10,000 cases.</p>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>