<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/jquery.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
<!--<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-1.10.2.min.js'></script>-->
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-migrate-1.2.1.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery.qtip.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/etext.js'></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec97">IV. Antibiotic Prophylaxis</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Antibiotics are administered prior to surgical procedures in order to prevent surgical site infections (SSIs), which occur in 2% to 5% of surgical patients. Documentation of the administration of antibiotic prophylaxis is a commonly used process measure by which anesthesia departments and hospitals are evaluated (eg, Surgical Care Improvement Program, Joint Commission). Surgical wounds are classified into four categories based on the degree of expected microbial contamination: clean, clean-contaminated, contaminated, and dirty. Although there is a moderate correlation between wound classification and SSI risk, other factors are also important. These include length of surgery, health status of the patient, and operative technique.</p>
<p class="indent">The microbial flora associated with SSIs vary based on surgical procedure and have also changed over time. For clean wounds, SSIs are usually caused by gram-positive skin flora such as <em>Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus epidermidis,</em> and streptococcal species. For clean-contaminated wounds, gram-negative organisms are more commonly involved. In recent years, the proportion of SSIs caused by gram-negative bacteria has decreased. <em>S. aureus</em> is currently the most common cause of SSIs, accounting for about 30% of SSIs. Methicillin-resistant <em>S. aureus</em> (MRSA) species are isolated from about half of these cases. In addition, fungi such as <em>Candida albicans</em> have been isolated from SSIs with growing frequency.</p>
<p class="indent">Cefazolin, a first-generation cephalosporin, is the most commonly used antibiotic for prophylaxis against SSIs. It has coverage against gram-positive cocci (except <em>Enterococcus</em>) as well as many gram-negative organisms such as <em>Escherichia coli, Proteus,</em> and <em>Klebsiella.</em> For most adults, an initial dose of 2&#x00A0;g is advised; 3&#x00A0;g is recommended for patients weighing &#x2265;120&#x00A0;kg, and weight-based dosing is used for pediatric patients. Clindamycin or vancomycin is recommended in patients with a true immunoglobulin-E&#x2013;mediated <em>&#x03B2;</em>-lactam antibiotic allergy. For patients known to be colonized with MRSA, a single dose of vancomycin may also be added preoperatively, as cefazolin does not cover MRSA. Antibiotic infusions should be administered within 1 hour of incision, with the exception of vancomycin and fluoroquinolones, which may be administered within 2 hours of incision. Infusions should be completed prior to incision and prior to the inflation of surgical tourniquets. Intraoperative redosing of antibiotics is recommended at intervals of approximately 2 drug half-lives. Redosing is also recommended in surgeries where blood loss is excessive (&#x003E;1500&#x00A0;mL) and when duration of drug half-life <a id="page357"></a>is shortened, such as through drug-drug interaction or in the setting of extensive burns. In general, antibiotics initiated solely for the purpose of prophylaxis against SSI need only be given intraoperatively; they should certainly be discontinued within 24 hours of surgery. There is no need to continue antibiotic prophylaxis based on the presence of indwelling catheters or surgical drains.</p>
<p class="indent">Colonization with <em>S. aureus,</em> which usually occurs in the nose, occurs in about 25% of the population and is a risk factor for SSI.<sup><a href="#bib37">37</a></sup> For this reason, preoperative screening and eradication of <em>S. aureus</em> has been recommended to reduce the rate of SSI, especially in high-risk groups such as cardiac and orthopedic surgery patients. Mupirocin is an intranasal ointment used to treat MRSA colonization.<sup><a href="#bib38">38</a></sup> When used preoperatively, it is generally administered 5&#x00A0;days prior to surgery.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen242">A. Surgical Prehabilitation</h5>
<p class="nonindent">A relatively new concept in perioperative medicine is that of surgical prehabilitation.<sup><a href="#bib39">39</a></sup> With the recognition that complications after surgery often lead to a significant decline in quality of life and the aging of the population, meaning that surgical patients are presenting at older ages than ever before, increasing attention is being given to the prevention of complications through preoperative optimization. Improved nutrition and physical fitness are the cornerstones of care. An exercise program that aims to improve both cardiovascular fitness and muscle mass and strength is ideal.</p>
<p class="indent">Malnutrition affects up to 40% of elderly patients and is especially common in patients with cancer. Preoperative nutritional assessments are useful in identifying high-risk patients. Albumin measurement can be useful in determining the severity of malnutrition. The goals of nutritional prehabilitation are not only to optimize weight but also to prevent stress-induced catabolism and maximize immune system function.</p>
<p class="BIBLIOGRAPHYpTitle">References</p>
<ol class="ref"><li id="bib1">Correll DJ, Bader AM, Hull MW, Hsu C, Tsen LC, Hepner DL. Value of preoperative clinic visits in identifying issues with potential impact on operating room efficiency. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2006;105(6):1254-1259.</li>
<li id="bib2">Ferschl MB, Tung A, Sweitzer B, et al. Preoperative clinic visits reduce operating room cancellations and delays. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2005;103(4):855-859.</li>
<li id="bib3">Blitz JD, Kendale SM, Jain SK, et al. Preoperative evaluation clinic visit is associated with decreased risk of in-hospital postoperative mortality. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2016;125(2):280-294.</li>
<li id="bib4">ASA Physical Status Classification System. Accessed March 4, 2020. <a href="https://www.asahq.org/standards-and-guidelines/asa-physical-status-classification-system">https://www.asahq.org/standards-and-guidelines/asa-physical-status-classification-system</a></li>
<li id="bib5">Devereaux PJ, Yang H, Yusuf S, et al. Effects of extended-release metoprolol succinate in patients undergoing non-cardiac surgery (POISE trial): a randomized controlled trial. <em>Lancet</em>. 2008;371:1839-1847.</li>
<li id="bib6">Poldermans D, Boersma E, Bax JJ, et al. The effect of bisoprolol on perioperative mortality and myocardial infarction in high-risk patients undergoing vascular surgery. Dutch Echocardiographic Cardiac Risk Evaluation Applying Stress Echocardiography Study Group. <em>N Engl J Med</em>. 1999;341:1789-1794.</li>
<li id="bib7">Dunkelgrun M, Boersma E, Schouten O, et al. Bisoprolol and fluvastatin for the reduction of perioperative cardiac mortality and myocardial infarction in intermediate-risk patients undergoing noncardiovascular surgery: a randomized controlled trial (DECREASE-IV). <em>Ann Surg</em>. 2009;249:921-926.</li>
<li id="bib8"><a id="page358"></a>Wijeysundera DN, Duncan D, Nkonde-Price C, et al. Perioperative beta blockade in noncardiac surgery: a systematic review for the 2014 ACC/AHA guideline on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and management of patients undergoing noncardiac surgery. a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on practice guidelines. <em>Circulation</em>. 2014;130:2246-2264.</li>
<li id="bib9">London MJ, Schwartz GG, Hur K, Henderson WG. Association of perioperative statin use with mortality and morbidity after major noncardiac surgery. <em>JAMA Intern Med</em>. 2017;177:231-242.</li>
<li id="bib10">Devereaux PJ, Mrkobrada M, Sessler DI, et al. Aspirin in patients undergoing noncardiac surgery. <em>N Engl J Med</em>. 2014;370(16):1494-1503.</li>
<li id="bib11">Levine GN, Bates ER, Bittl JA, et al. 2016 ACC/AHA guideline focused update on duration of dual antiplatelet therapy in patients with coronary artery disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on clinical practice guidelines. <em>J Am Coll Cardiol</em>. 2016;68(10):1082-1115.</li>
<li id="bib12">Kirchhof P, Benussi S, Kotecha D, et al. 2016 ESC guidelines for the management of atrial fibrillation developed in collaboration with EACTS. <em>Europace</em>. 2016;18(11):1609-1678.</li>
<li id="bib13">Horlocker TT, Vandermeuelen E, Kopp SL, et al. Regional anesthesia in the patient receiving antithrombotic or thrombolytic therapy: American Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine evidence-based guidelines (fourth edition). <em>Reg Anesth Pain Med</em>. 2018;43(3):263-309.</li>
<li id="bib14">Acampora GA, Nisavic M, Zhang Y. Perioperative buprenorphine continuous maintenance and administration simultaneous with full opioid agonist: patient priority at the interface between medical disciplines. <em>J Clin Psychiatry</em>. 2020;7(1):81.</li>
<li id="bib15">Quaye AN, Zhang Y. Perioperative management of buprenorphine: solving the conundrum. <em>Pain Med</em>. 2019;20(7):1395-1408.</li>
<li id="bib16">Savic LC, Khan DA, Kopac P. Management of a surgical patient with a label of penicillin allergy: narrative review and consensus recommendations. <em>Br J Anaesth</em>. 2019;123(1):e82-e94.</li>
<li id="bib17">Shenoy ES, Macy E, Rowe T, et al. Evaluation and management of penicillin allergy: a review. <em>J Am Med Assoc</em>. 2019;321(2):188-199.</li>
<li id="bib18">Mallampati RS, Gatt SP, Gugino LD, et al. A clinical sign to predict difficult tracheal intubation. A prospective study. <em>Can Anaesth Soc J</em>. 1985;32:429.</li>
<li id="bib19">Fleisher LA, Fleischmann KE, Auerbach AD, et al. 2014 ACC/AHA guideline on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and management of patients undergoing noncardiac surgery: executive summary. A report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on practice guidelines. <em>Circulation</em>. 2014;130:e278-e333.</li>
<li id="bib20">Longrois D, Hoeft A, De Hert S. 2014 European Society of Cardiology/European Society of Anaesthesiology guidelines on non-cardiac surgery: cardiovascular assessment and management. A short explanatory statement from the European Society of Anaesthesiology members who participated in the European Task Force. <em>Eur J Anaesthesiol</em>. 2014;31(10):513-516.</li>
<li id="bib21">Crossley GH, Poole JE, Rozner MA, et al. The Heart Rhythm Society (HRS)/American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) Expert Consensus Statement on the perioperative management of patients with implantable defibrillators, pacemakers and arrhythmia monitors: facilities and patient management this document was developed as a joint project with the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA), and in collaboration with the American Heart Association (AHA), and the Society of Thoracic Surgeons (STS). <em>Heart Rhythm</em>. 2011;8:1114-1154.</li>
<li id="bib22">Practice advisory for the perioperative management of patients with cardiac implantable electronic devices: pacemakers and implantable cardioverter&#x2013;defibrillators 2020. An updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Perioperative Management of Patients with Cardiac Implantable Electronic Devices. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2020;132:225-252.</li>
<li id="bib23">Lapage KG, Wouters PF. The patient with hypertension undergoing surgery. <em>Curr Opin Anaesthesiol</em>. 2016;29(3):397-402.</li>
<li id="bib24">Yang CK, Teng A, Lee DY, et al. Pulmonary complications after major abdominal surgery: National Surgical Quality Improvement Program analysis. <em>J Surg Res</em>. 2015;198:441-449.</li>
<li id="bib25">Chan MTV, Wang CY, Seet E, et al. Association of unrecognized obstructive sleep apnea with postoperative cardiovascular events in patients undergoing major noncardiac surgery. <em>J Am Med Assoc</em>. 2019;321(18):1788-1798.</li>
<li id="bib26"><a id="page359"></a>American Society of Anesthesiologists. Practice guidelines for the perioperative management of patients with obstructive sleep apnea. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2014;120:268-286.</li>
<li id="bib27">Joshi GP, Chung F, Vann MA, et al. Society for Ambulatory Anesthesia consensus statement on perioperative blood glucose management in diabetic patients undergoing ambulatory surgery. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2010;111:1378-1387.</li>
<li id="bib28">Moghissi ES, Korytkowski MT, DiNardo M, et al. American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and American Diabetes Association consensus statement on inpatient glycemic control. <em>Endocr Pract</em>. 2009;15:353-369.</li>
<li id="bib29">Sebranek JJ, Kopp Lugli A, Coursin DB. Glycaemic control in the perioperative period. <em>Br J Anaesth</em>. 2013;111:18.</li>
<li id="bib30">Benarroch-Gampel J, Sheffield KM, Duncan CB, et al. Preoperative laboratory testing in patients undergoing elective, low-risk ambulatory surgery. <em>Ann Surg</em>. 2012;256:518.</li>
<li id="bib31">Finegan BA, Rashiq S, McAlister FA, O&#x2019;Connor P. Selective ordering of preoperative investigations by anesthesiologists reduces the number and cost of tests. <em>Can J Anaesth</em>. 2005;52(6):575-580.</li>
<li id="bib32">Committee on Standards and Practice Parameters; Apfelbaum JL, Connis RT, Nickinovich DG, et al. Practice advisory for preanesthesia evaluation: an updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on preanesthesia evaluation. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2012;116(3):522-538.</li>
<li id="bib33">Colla CH, Mainor AJ. Choosing Wisely Campaign: valuable for providers who knew about it, but awareness remained constant, 2014-17. <em>Health Aff (Millwood)</em>. 2017;36(11):2005-2011.</li>
<li id="bib34">Martin SK, Cifu AS. Routine preoperative laboratory tests for elective surgery. <em>J Am Med Assoc</em>. 2017;318:567-568.</li>
<li id="bib35">Edwards AF, Forest DJ. Preoperative laboratory testing. <em>Anesthesiol Clin</em>. 2018;36(4):493-507.</li>
<li id="bib36">Saraswat MK, Magruder JT, Crawford TC, et al. Preoperative <em>Staphylococcus aureus</em> screening and targeted decolonization in cardiac surgery. <em>Ann Thorac Surg</em>. 2017;104(4):1349-1356.</li>
<li id="bib37">American Society of Anesthesiologists. Practice guidelines for preoperative fasting and the use of pharmacologic agents to reduce the risk of pulmonary aspiration: application to healthy patients undergoing elective procedures. An updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on preoperative fasting and the use of pharmacologic agents to reduce the risk of pulmonary aspiration. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2017;126(3):376-393.</li>
<li id="bib38">Jernigan JA, Pullen AL, Partin C, Jarvis WR. Prevalence of and risk factors for colonization with methicillin-resistant <em>Staphylococcus aureus</em> in an outpatient clinic population. <em>Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol</em>. 2003;24(6):445-450.</li>
<li id="bib39">Whittle J, Wischmeyer PE, Grocott MPW, Miller TE. Surgical prehabilitation: nutrition and exercise. <em>Anesthesiol Clin</em>. 2018;36(4):567-580.<a id="page360"></a></li></ol>
<a id="page361"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp16_1" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_caf/16_Preop_Evaluation/story.html'">Infographic 16.1 A Closer Look at Preoperative Cardiac Ultrasound  <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<a id="page362"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp16_2" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/16A_Preoperative_Evaluation_and_Management/index.html'">Interactive Video Lecture 16a. Preoperative Evaluation and Management <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<a id="page363"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp16_3" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/16B_Preoperative_Evaluation_and_Management/index.html'">Interactive Video Lecture 16b. Preoperative Evaluation and Management <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<div class="u_footnote">
<p class="u_footnote"><sup>a</sup><a href="https://thrombosiscanada.ca/tools/?calc=perioperativeAnticoagulantAlgorithm">https://thrombosiscanada.ca/tools/?calc=perioperativeAnticoagulantAlgorithm</a>.</p>
<p class="u_footnote"><sup>b</sup><a href="http://www.riskcalculator.facs.org">www.riskcalculator.facs.org</a> and <a href="http://http://www.surgicalriskcalculator.com/microcardiacarrest">http://www.surgicalriskcalculator.com/microcardiacarrest</a>.</p>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>