<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/jquery.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
<!--<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-1.10.2.min.js'></script>-->
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-migrate-1.2.1.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery.qtip.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/etext.js'></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec71"><a id="page235"></a>IX. Conclusion</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Neuromuscular blockade has facilitated many advances in anesthesia but also carries considerable risk. Understanding the physiology of the neuromuscular junction yields an appreciation for the effects of NMBAs and the need to follow patient response to these agents. Proper monitoring during maintenance paralysis allows selection of an effective reversal strategy to minimize the risk of complications associated with residual weakness.</p>
<p class="BIBLIOGRAPHYpTitle">References</p>
<ol class="ref"><li id="bib1">Scholz A. Mechanisms of (local) anaesthetics on voltage-gated sodium and other ion channels. <em>Br J Anaesth</em>. 2002;89(1):52-61. PMID: 12173241.</li>
<li id="bib2">Schreiber JU, Lysakowski C, Fuchs-Buder T, Tram&#x00E8;r MR. Prevention of succinylcholine-induced fasciculation and myalgia: a meta-analysis of randomized trials. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2005;103(4):877-884. PMID: 16192781.</li>
<li id="bib3">Kovarik WD, Mayberg TS, Lam AM, Mathisen TL, Winn HR. Succinylcholine does not change intracranial pressure, cerebral blood flow velocity, or the electroencephalogram in patients with neurologic injury. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 1994;78(3):469-473. PMID: 8109761.</li>
<li id="bib4">Dexter F, Epstein RH, Wachtel RE, Rosenberg H. Estimate of the relative risk of succinylcholine for triggering malignant hyperthermia. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2013;116(1):118-122. PMID: 23223104.</li>
<li id="bib5">Tang L, Li S, Huang S, Ma H, Wang Z. Desaturation following rapid sequence induction using succinylcholine vs. rocuronium in overweight patients. <em>Acta Anaesthesiol Scand</em>. 2011;55(2):203-208. PMID: 21226862.</li>
<li id="bib6">Martyn JA, Richtsfeld M. Succinylcholine-induced hyperkalemia in acquired pathologic states: etiologic factors and molecular mechanisms. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2006;104(1):158-169. PMID: 16394702.</li>
<li id="bib7">Naguib M, Brull SJ, Kopman AF, et al. Consensus statement on perioperative use of neuromuscular monitoring. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 07 2018;127(1):71-80. PMID: 29200077.</li>
<li id="bib8">G&#x00E4;tke MR, Larsen PB, Engbaek J, Fredensborg BB, Berg H, Viby-Mogensen J. Acceleromyography of the orbicularis oculi muscle I: significance of the electrode position. <em>Acta Anaesthesiol Scand</em>. 2002;46(9):1124-1130. PMID: 12366508.</li>
<li id="bib9">Thilen SR, Hansen BE, Ramaiah R, Kent CD, Treggiari MM, Bhananker SM. Intraoperative neuromuscular monitoring site and residual paralysis. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2012;117(5):964-972. PMID: 16394702.</li>
<li id="bib10">Viby-Mogensen J, J&#x2298;rgensen BC, Ording H. Residual curarization in the recovery room. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 1979;50(6):539-541. PMID: 156513.</li>
<li id="bib11">Fortier LP, McKeen D, Turner K, et al. The RECITE study: a Canadian prospective, multicenter study of the incidence and severity of residual neuromuscular blockade. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2015;121(2):366-372. PMID: 25902322.</li>
<li id="bib12">Kirkegaard H, Heier T, Caldwell J. Efficacy of tactile-guided reversal from cisatracurium-induced neuromuscular block. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2002;96(1):45-50. PMID: 11753000.</li>
<li id="bib13">Kopman A, Naguib M. Neostigmine-induced weakness after sugammadex &#x2013; A reply. <em>Anaesthesia</em>. 2019;74(2):254. PMID: 30656654.</li>
<li id="bib14">Kaufhold N, Schaller SJ, St&#x00E4;uble CG, et al. Sugammadex and neostigmine dose-finding study for reversal of residual neuromuscular block at a train-of-four ratio of 0.2 (SUNDRO20)&#x2020;. <em>Br J Anaesth</em>. 2016;116(2):233-240. PMID: 26787792.</li>
<li id="bib15">Miller R, Van Nyhuis L, Eger E., Vitez T, Way W. Comparative times to peak effect and durations of action of neostigmine and pyridostigmine. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 1974;41(1):27-33. PMID: 4834375.</li>
<li id="bib16">Kirkegaard-Nielsen H, Helbo-Hansen HS, Lindholm P, Severinsen IK, B&#x00FC;low K. Time to peak effect of neostigmine at antagonism of atracurium- or vecuronium-induced neuromuscular block. <em>J Clin Anesth</em>. 1995;7(8):635-639. PMID: 8747561.</li>
<li id="bib17"><a id="page236"></a>Donati F. Residual paralysis: a real problem or did we invent a new disease? <em>Can J Anaesth</em>. 2013;60(7):714-729. PMID: 23625545.</li>
<li id="bib18">Plaud B, Debaene B, Donati F, Marty J. Residual paralysis after emergence from anesthesia. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2010;112(4):1013-1022. PMID: 20234315.</li>
<li id="bib19">Gan TJ, Belani KG, Bergese S, et al. Fourth consensus guidelines for the management of postoperative nausea and vomiting. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2020;131(2):411-448. PMID: 32467512.</li>
<li id="bib20">Kotake Y, Ochiai R, Suzuki T, et al. Reversal with sugammadex in the absence of monitoring did not preclude residual neuromuscular block. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2013;117(2):345-351. PMID: 23757472.</li>
<li id="bib21">Yamamoto S, Yamamoto Y, Kitajima O, Maeda T, Suzuki T. Reversal of neuromuscular block with sugammadex: a comparison of the corrugator supercilii and adductor pollicis muscles in a randomized dose-response study. <em>Acta Anaesthesiol Scand</em>. 2015;59(7):892-901. PMID: 25962400.</li>
<li id="bib22">de Souza CM, Tardelli MA, Tedesco H, et al. Efficacy and safety of sugammadex in the reversal of deep neuromuscular blockade induced by rocuronium in patients with end-stage renal disease: a comparative prospective clinical trial. <em>Eur J Anaesthesiol</em>. 2015;32(10):681-686. PMID: 25829395.</li>
<li id="bib23">Galv&#x00E3;o VR, Giavina-Bianchi P, Castells M. Perioperative anaphylaxis. <em>Curr Allergy Asthma Rep</em>. 2014;14(8):452. PMID: 24951238.</li>
<li id="bib24">Orihara M, Takazawa T, Horiuchi T, et al. Comparison of incidence of anaphylaxis between sugammadex and neostigmine: a retrospective multicentre observational study. <em>Br J Anaesth</em>. 2020;124(2):154-163. PMID: 31791621.</li>
<li id="bib25">Savic L, Savic S, Hopkins PM. Anaphylaxis to sugammadex: should we be concerned by the Japanese experience? <em>Br J Anaesth</em>. 2020;124(4):P370-P372. PMID: 31982112.<a id="page237"></a><a id="page238"></a></li></ol>
<a id="page239"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp11_1" onclick="openLinkInNewTab('https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_caf/11_Sugammadex/story.html');">Infographic 11.1 A Closer Look at Sugammadex  <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<a id="page240"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp11_2" onclick="openLinkInNewTab('https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/11_Neuromuscular_Blocking_Agents/index.html');">Interactive Video Lecture 11. Neuromuscular Blocking Agents <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>