<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec106">IX. Collagen Vascular Diseases</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen263">A. Rheumatoid Arthritis</h5>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><em>Rheumatoid arthritis (RA)</em></strong> is a chronic, autoimmune disease marked by systemic inflammation that primarily affects peripheral synovial joints, leading to symmetric painful arthritis. Eventual joint deformity, cartilage erosion, and ankylosing, or joint stiffening, develop in patients. <strong><em>Atlantoaxial subluxation</em></strong> is a common occult radiographic finding. Clinical signs of prolonged joint involvement, synovial fluid analysis, imaging, the presence of RA serology markers, such as rheumatoid factor, and nonspecific inflammatory markers, such as erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein, support the diagnosis. Extra-articular involvement is common and unpredictable. Chronic inflammation likely contributes to accelerated atherosclerotic disease, myocarditis, pericarditis, and valvulopathies. Ischemic heart disease is the most common cause of death. Rheumatoid lung disease can manifest as pleurisy, pulmonary nodules, interstitial lung disease, and pulmonary hypertension. Rheumatoid vasculitis can cause widespread organ injury, specifically renal failure and ischemic stroke.</p>
<p class="indent">Therapeutics for RA are broadly divided into NSAIDs, corticosteroids, disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs), and biologic DMARDs. <strong><em>Prednisone</em></strong> is used during flare-ups or until DMARD therapy is optimized. Despite the risks of long-term corticosteroid use, many RA patients remain on chronic prednisone therapy. <strong><em>Methotrexate</em></strong> is the mainstay drug of DMARD therapy. Drug-induced interstitial lung disease is a known risk of methotrexate in RA therapy. Other DMARDs include leflunomide, hydroxychloroquine, and sulfasalazine. Biologic DMARDs are intended to target cell surface molecules and cytokines to block the inflammation cascade. Infection and hypersensitivity reactions are the most serious complications associated with DMARD therapy.<sup><a href="ch017-sec10.xhtml#bib8">8</a></sup></p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen264">B. Systemic Lupus Erythematosus</h5>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><em>Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)</em></strong> is an autoimmune disorder in which immune complexes formed by autoantibodies and soluble antigens, also known as <strong><em>type III hypersensitivity</em></strong>, deposit in various organs, producing inflammation and tissue injury. Clinical features of SLE and detection of antinuclear antibody most often confirm diagnosis.</p>
<p class="indent">The presenting time course and symptoms are variable. Myalgias and fatigue are common symptoms. A photosensitive &#x201C;butterfly rash&#x201D; over the malar eminence is characteristic of SLE. Most patients experience mild to <a id="page375"></a>severely debilitating polyarthritis. Lupus glomerulonephritis, if untreated, can lead to end-stage renal disease and death. Pericarditis and pleuritis are common manifestations of SLE. Vascular occlusive disease may present with Raynaud phenomenon, acute ischemic stroke, or myocardial infarction.</p>
<p class="indent">Current treatment options have reduced morbidity and mortality. Corticosteroids and hydroxychloroquine are first-line therapies for acute flare-ups. Inflammation, chronic pain, and arthralgias are usually controlled with NSAIDs. Potent immunosuppressive agents, such as cyclophosphamide or mycophenolate, are used to treat severe glomerulonephritis.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen265">C. Systemic Sclerosis</h5>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><em>Systemic sclerosis (SSc)</em></strong>, or scleroderma, is a rare autoimmune disorder marked by destructive, multisystem microvasculopathy, and organ fibrosis. Skin thickening is the most obvious physical sign, whereas Raynaud phenomenon is usually the presenting sign associated with scleroderma. Traditionally, the presence of CREST syndrome (<strong><em>C</em></strong>alcinosis, <strong><em>R</em></strong>aynaud phenomenon, <strong><em>E</em></strong>sophageal dysmotility, <strong><em>S</em></strong>clerodactyly, <strong><em>T</em></strong>elangiectasia) has been used for diagnosis. Quality-of-life optimization, organ injury prevention, and delay of disease progression are the focuses of treatment. Painful ischemic digits are treated with calcium channel blockers, stress management, and cold temperature avoidance. Active skin disease can be treated with immunosuppressants, such as mycophenolate or cyclophosphamide. Corticosteroids for skin disease should be avoided, because they can lead to a scleroderma renal crisis, manifested by acute hypertension and oliguric renal failure. The most common problem in scleroderma is gastrointestinal dysfunction. Dysphagia, esophageal dysmotility, esophageal strictures, gastroesophageal reflux, and delayed gastric emptying are treated with proton-pump inhibitors and prokinetics. Myocarditis and conduction abnormalities are usually silent. Calcium channel blockers and other vasodilators may be used to preserve cardiac function. Lung disease is the primary cause of death in scleroderma.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen266">D. Inflammatory Myopathies</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Inflammatory myopathies are a rare group of muscle disorders typified by muscle inflammation and weakness. <strong><em>Dermatomyositis (DM)</em></strong> and <strong><em>polymyositis (PM)</em></strong> are the predominant subtypes of inflammatory myopathies. Both conditions are considered autoimmune disorders, with an acute to subacute presentation usually after a systemic infection. Presenting features of PM include muscle pain and weakness that typically affects muscles of the proximal limbs, posterior neck, pharynx, and larynx. Ocular muscles are spared. DM has a similar presentation, except that onset can be more severe with additional dermal features: heliotropic eyelid discoloration, periorbital edema, and erythematous scaly rash involving the face and the extensor surface of limbs. Muscle necrosis and inflammatory cells on muscle tissue biopsy confirms diagnosis. Complications of both PM and DM include cardiomyopathy, respiratory insufficiency, dysphagia, and aspiration pneumonia.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>