<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/jquery.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
<!--<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-1.10.2.min.js'></script>-->
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-migrate-1.2.1.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery.qtip.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/etext.js'></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec88">V. Anesthesia Workstation Preuse Checkout</h4>
<p class="nonindent">The American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) has published, and regularly revises, recommendations for a preuse checkout of the anesthesia workstation. A basic summary of the 15-point checklist is provided in <strong><a href="#tt14-2">Table 14.2</a></strong>. However, the full, comprehensive elaboration of the checklist can be found at the ASA website.<sup><a href="#bib9">9</a></sup> Anesthesiologists are advised to follow these recommendations. Additionally, they are encouraged to become familiar with the manufacturer&#x2019;s operations manual for the specific workstation(s) they intend to use.</p>
<p class="video"><video data-id="I32kB4LA" controls="controls" class="jwp-video" crossorigin="anonymous" style="width:100%; height:auto; width:320px; height:240px;">Browser issues</video></p>
<p class="video1" id="vid14-5"><strong>VIDEO 14.5</strong></p>
<p class="video2"><strong>Water Condensation in Breathing Circuit</strong></p>
<a id="page305"></a>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt14-2"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;14.2</span> Summary of the American Society of Anesthesiologists Preanesthesia Checkout Recommendations</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="TbUL1">ITEMS TO BE COMPLETED (*, daily; +, before each procedure):</p>
<p class="TbUL1">Item 1*: Verify auxiliary oxygen cylinder and self-inflating manual ventilation device are available and functioning.</p>
<p class="TbUL1">Item 2*+: Verify patient suction is adequate to clear the airway.</p>
<p class="TbUL1">Item 3*: Turn on anesthesia delivery system and confirm that AC power is available.</p>
<p class="TbUL1">Item 4*+: Verify availability of required monitors and check alarms.</p>
<p class="TbUL1">Item 5*: Verify that pressure is adequate on the spare oxygen cylinder mounted on the anesthesia machine.</p>
<p class="TbUL1">Item 6*: Verify that piped gas pressures are &#x2265;50 psi gauge.</p>
<p class="TbUL1">Item 7*+: Verify that vaporizers are adequately filled and, if applicable, that the filler ports are tightly closed.</p>
<p class="TbUL1">Item 8*: Verify that there are no leaks in the gas supply lines between the flowmeters and the common gas outlet.</p>
<p class="TbUL1">Item 9*: Test scavenging system function.</p>
<p class="TbUL1">Item 10*: Calibrate, or verify calibration of, the oxygen monitor and check the low oxygen alarm. Verify the function of the carbon dioxide analyzer.</p>
<p class="TbUL1">Item 11*+: Verify carbon dioxide absorbent is not exhausted.</p>
<p class="TbUL1">Item 12*+: Breathing system pressure and leak testing.</p>
<p class="TbUL1">Item 13*+: Verify that gas flows properly through the breathing circuit during both inspiration and exhalation. Check function of one-way valves.</p>
<p class="TbUL1">Item 14*+: Document completion of checkout procedures.</p>
<p class="TbUL1">Item 15*+: Confirm ventilator settings and evaluate readiness to deliver anesthesia care.</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">From The American Society of Anesthesiologists. <em>2008 Recommendations for Preanesthesia Checkout</em>. 2008. <a href="http://www.asahq.org/For-Members/Clinical-Information/2008-ASA-Recommendations-for-PreAnesthesia-Checkout.aspx">www.asahq.org/For-Members/Clinical-Information/2008-ASA-Recommendations-for-PreAnesthesia-Checkout.aspx</a></p>
</div>
<p class="BIBLIOGRAPHYpTitle">References</p>
<ol class="ref"><li id="bib1">Dorsch JA, Dorsch SE. <em>A Practical Approach to Anesthesia Equipment</em>. Lippincott Williams &#x0026; Wilkins; 2011.</li>
<li id="bib2">Davey AJ, Ali D.. <em>Ward&#x2019;s Anaesthetic Equipment</em>. 6th ed. Elsevier; 2012.</li>
<li id="bib3">Baha A. <em>Essentials of Equipment in Anaesthesia, Critical Care and Peri-Operative Medicine</em>. 5th ed. Elsevier; 2019.</li>
<li id="bib4">Ehrenwerth J. <em>Anesthesia Equipment: Principles and Applications</em>. 2nd ed. Saunders; 2013.</li>
<li id="bib5">Atlas G. A method to quickly estimate remaining time for an oxygen E-cylinder. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2004;98:1190.</li>
<li id="bib6">Andrews JJ, Johnston RV Jr, Kramer GC. Consequences of misfilling contemporary vaporizers with desflurane. <em>Can J Anaesth</em>. 1993;40:71.</li>
<li id="bib7">Versichelen LF, Bouche MP, Rolly G, et al. Only carbon dioxide absorbents free of both NaOH and KOH do not generate compound-A during in vitro closed system sevoflurane. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2001;95:750.</li>
<li id="bib8">Olympio MA. <em>Modern Anesthesia Machines Offer New Safety Features. Anesthesia Patient Safety Foundation Newsletter</em>. 2003. <a href="https://www.apsf.org/article/modern-anesthesia-machines-offer-new-safety-features/">https://www.apsf.org/article/modern-anesthesia-machines-offer-new-safety-features/</a></li>
<li id="bib9">The American Society of Anesthesiologists. <em>2008 Recommendations for Preanesthesia Checkout</em>. 2008. <a href="https://www.asahq.org/standards-and-guidelines/2008-asa-recommendations-for-pre-anesthesia-checkout">https://www.asahq.org/standards-and-guidelines/2008-asa-recommendations-for-pre-anesthesia-checkout</a></li></ol>
<a id="page306"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp14_1" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_caf/14_ASA_Preanesthesia_Checkout/story.html'">Infographic 14.1 A Closer Look at ASA Preanesthesia Checkout <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<a id="page307"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp14_2" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/14A_The_Anesthesia_Workstation/index.html'">Interactive Video Lecture 14a. The Anesthesia Workstation <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<div class="link-me" id="grp14_3" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/14B_The_Anesthesia_Workstation/index.html'">Interactive Video Lecture 14b. The Anesthesia Workstation <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>