<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec98">I. Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Duchenne muscular dystrophy is an X-linked disorder leading to a loss of functional dystrophin, a protein integral to muscle membrane cytoskeleton stability. It presents in childhood and is characterized by proximal muscle weakness and painless muscle atrophy in boys. Serum creatine kinase levels are used for screening in newborns and assessment of muscle degeneration. Patients succumb to cardiopulmonary complications by middle age.</p>
<p class="indent">Cardiomyopathy and rhythm disorders are common. Surveillance with electrocardiography and echocardiography and treatment with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and beta-blockers are routine. Dysrhythmias should be periodically assessed with Holter monitoring.</p>
<p class="indent">Recurrent pneumonia occurs due to poor cough effort and inadequate secretion clearance. Derangements in gastric motility result in delayed gastric emptying.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">In Duchenne muscular dystrophy, succinylcholine is contraindicated due to risk of hyperkalemia and rhabdomyolysis.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen243">A. Management of Anesthesia</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Gastric dysmotility increases the risk of aspiration. Succinylcholine is contraindicated due to risk of hyperkalemia and rhabdomyolysis. Prolonged muscle relaxation may occur with nondepolarizing agents. Potent volatile anesthetics should be used with caution, since exposure may trigger rhabdomyolysis and cardiac complications. Postoperative ventilatory support may be needed especially if there is poor preoperative pulmonary function.<sup><a href="ch017-sec10.xhtml#bib1">1</a></sup></p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>