<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec68">VI. Altered Responses to Neuromuscular Blocking Agents</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Multiple factors affect the pharmacokinetics of all drugs, including NMBAs. Intraoperative hypothermia prolongs the duration of NMBAs by decreasing receptor sensitivity and ACh mobilization, decreasing the force of muscle contraction, and reducing renal and hepatic metabolism as well as the Hofmann degradation pathway.</p>
<p class="indent">Aging results in a decrease in total body water and serum albumin concentration, which reduces the volume of distribution of NMBAs. Decreased cardiac function, glomerular filtration rate, and liver blood flow all contribute to a reduced rate of NMBA elimination (especially the aminosteroid compounds).</p>
<p class="indent">Acid-base and electrolyte imbalance affect the duration of action of NMBAs, including their metabolism and elimination. Hypokalemia potentiates nondepolarizing block and decreases the effectiveness of anticholinesterases (neostigmine) in antagonizing nondepolarizing block. Hypermagnesemia prolongs the duration of action of NMBAs by inhibiting pre- and postsynaptic Ca<sup>2+</sup> channels. Acidosis interferes with the ability of anticholinesterases to reverse a nondepolarizing block. Hypercarbia also leads to acidosis, impairing NMBA antagonism.</p>
<p class="indent">The duration of action of aminosteroid NMBAs is prolonged by liver and kidney dysfunction. For this reason, benzylisoquinolinium-class NMBAs are preferred in patients with organ dysfunction (such as critically ill patients in the intensive care unit), because they are metabolized by organ-independent, nonenzymatic pathways.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>