<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<section epub:type="chapter">
<div id="main_container">
<header>
<h1 id="c01" class="chapter_name"><span class="chapter_name">14</span></h1>
<h2 class="chapter_title">The Anesthesia Workstation</h2>
<p class="author">Naveen Nathan</p>
</header>
<p class="nonindent">It is common for students, nurses, and physicians in the earliest phases of their anesthesiology training to be intimidated when confronted by the anesthesia workstation. The sheer number of cables, hoses, knobs, digital displays, and alarms may seem formidable. This chapter aims to deconstruct the anatomy and functionality of the conventional anesthesia workstation and characterize the principles underlying its use.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">The modern anesthesia workstation is a sophisticated device that contributes to patient safety, but like many modern devices, it is complex and may fail. A simple self-inflating bag and mask must always be immediately available.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">As a salient and indispensable component of the operating room, the anesthesia workstation serves to achieve four goals: (1) provide a reliable mechanism to continually ventilate the anesthetized patient, (2) serve as a source for supplemental O<sub>2</sub>, (3) provide a mechanism for the delivery of volatile anesthetic agents, and (4) serve as a monitor and early warning system for several potential hazards encountered in clinical anesthetic care. Note that a variety of simple tools exist to achieve each of these goals individually (eg, a bag valve mask device [Ambu bag] may be used to ventilate a patient&#x2019;s lungs, and a simple E-cylinder filled with pressurized oxygen may be used to increase the fraction of inspired oxygen [FiO<sub>2</sub>]). The anesthesia workstation, however, incorporates and consolidates all of the above goals in a manner that is convenient and allows the anesthesiologist to be more vigilant in performing other equally important facets of anesthetic care. It cannot be overemphasized that this convenience comes at the price of complexity. Many intraoperative crises can be avoided by appreciating the design, functionality, and limitations of modern anesthesia workstations.</p>
</div>
</section>
</body>
</html>