<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec113">VI. Diabetes Mellitus</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen282">A. Physiology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Diabetes mellitus is a disease caused by dysfunction of glucose metabolism as a result of either an absolute or a relative (lack of effect) insulin deficiency.<sup><a href="ch018-sec07.xhtml#bib4">4</a>,<a href="ch018-sec07.xhtml#bib12">12</a>,<a href="ch018-sec07.xhtml#bib13">13</a></sup> Insulin is produced in the pancreas by &#x03B2; <strong><em>cells in the islets of Langerhans</em></strong>. Factors that increase insulin secretion include increased levels of plasma glucose, gastrointestinal hormones (incretin hormones), autonomic stimulation (vagal and &#x03B2; adrenergic), &#x03B1; blockade, and nitric oxide. Hypoglycemia and hypokalemia decrease insulin secretion. Insulin is metabolized in the liver and kidneys.</p>
<p class="indent">The principal effect of insulin is to increase glucose uptake in insulin-sensitive cells (skeletal and adipose tissue). In the absence of effective insulin, lipids and proteins are metabolized to produce glucose, and ketones (ketoacids) are generated as a byproduct.</p>
<p class="indent">Insulin secretion or action is opposed by counterregulatory hormones (glucagon, glucocorticoids, catecholamines, growth hormone) and cytokines, which are typically released under stress (trauma, surgery, sepsis) and lead to stress-induced hyperglycemia. Hyperglycemia (defined as &#x003E;180&#x00A0;mg/dL) leads to osmotic diuresis and fluid and electrolyte disturbances. Diabetes is associated with micro- and macrovascular diseases, neuropathy, nephropathy, retinopathy, impaired wound healing, and deficient immunocompetence.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen283">B. Classification</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Diabetes is classified into four broad categories: type 1, type 2, gestational diabetes, and diabetes due to other causes (<strong><a href="#tt18-15">Table 18.15</a></strong>).<sup><a href="ch018-sec07.xhtml#bib4">4</a>,<a href="ch018-sec07.xhtml#bib13">13</a></sup> <strong><em>Type 1 diabetes</em></strong> results from an absolute lack of insulin, typically due to autoimmune destruction of the islets of Langerhans. It presents early in life and requires treatment with exogenous insulin. Patients with type 1 diabetes are also prone to diabetic ketoacidosis.</p>
<p class="indent"><strong><em>Type 2 diabetes</em></strong> accounts for 90% of all patients with diabetes. They are typically older and overweight and have developed a resistance to the effects of insulin. Initially, hyperglycemia causes a compensatory increase in insulin production. As the disease progresses, many patients require exogenous insulin to control hyperglycemia.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">An oral glucose tolerance test involves the administration of 75&#x00A0;g anhydrous glucose dissolved in water. A 2-hour plasma glucose &#x2265;200&#x00A0;mg/dL is diagnostic of diabetes.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen284">C. Diagnosis</h5>
<p class="nonindent">A fasting blood glucose of &#x003C;100&#x00A0;mg/dL is considered normal, while a fasting glucose of &#x2265;126&#x00A0;mg/dL on two occasions confirms the diagnosis of diabetes (<strong><a href="#tt18-15">Table 18.15</a></strong>).<sup><a href="ch018-sec07.xhtml#bib12">12</a>,<a href="ch018-sec07.xhtml#bib13">13</a></sup> Patients with fasting glucose levels between 101 and 125&#x00A0;mg/dL are considered <strong><em>prediabetic</em></strong>. An abnormal glucose tolerance test or severe hyperglycemia (&#x003E;200&#x00A0;mg/dL) in the presence of symptoms of hyperglycemia also fulfills the criteria for diabetes, as does a hemoglobin A1c level of &#x2265;6.5%.<sup><a href="ch018-sec07.xhtml#bib4">4</a>,<a href="ch018-sec07.xhtml#bib12">12</a></sup></p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen285">D. Treatment</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Type 1 diabetics require <strong><em>insulin</em></strong> treatment. This typically involves a regimen of intermediate- or long-acting insulin plus short-acting insulin with meals titrated to blood glucose level. Alternatively, patients may be managed with an indwelling insulin pump. Insulin pumps are programmed to release a basal amount of insulin continuously and boluses with meals.</p>
<p class="indent">Type 2 diabetics are typically started on a regimen that involves diet management, weight control, exercise, and metformin. Metformin is a biguanide<a id="page397"></a> that decreases hepatic glucose production and increases the sensitivity of hepatic and peripheral tissues to insulin. Biguanides are just one class of <strong><em>oral hypoglycemics</em></strong> used in the treatment of type 2 diabetes. There are several other classes of oral hypoglycemics that increase insulin secretion (sulfonylureas); increase peripheral insulin sensitivity (glitazones); enhance or mimic the action of gastrointestinal hormones that increase insulin secretion (gliptins); decrease carbohydrate absorption from the gastrointestinal tract (alpha-glucosidase inhibitors); or enhance renal excretion of glucose (sodium-glucose transport-2 inhibitors). These may be used in combination or with exogenous insulin. The goal is a HbA1c &#x003C;7%.<sup><a href="ch018-sec07.xhtml#bib14">14</a></sup> Bariatric surgery is a consideration for type 2 diabetics with a body mass index &#x003E;35&#x00A0;kg/m<sup>2</sup>.</p>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt18-15"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;18.15</span> Diabetes Mellitus Classification and Diagnosis</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong><em>Classification</em></strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Type 1 (Insulin Dependent)</strong></p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Childhood onset</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Thin</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Prone to ketoacidosis</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Always requires exogenous insulin</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Type 2 (Noninsulin Dependent)</strong></p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Maturity onset</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Obese</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Not prone to ketoacidosis</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">May be controlled by diet or oral hypoglycemic drugs</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Gestational Diabetes</strong></p>
<p class="tbodyleft">May presage future type 2 diabetes mellitus</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Diabetes From Other Causes</strong></p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Pancreatic surgery</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Chronic pancreatitis</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Endocrine diseases (pheochromocytoma, acromegaly, Cushing disease, exogenous steroids)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Treatment of HIV/AIDS</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong><em>Diagnosis</em></strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Hemoglobin A1c &#x2265;6.5%</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Fasting plasma glucose &#x2265;126&#x00A0;mg/dL (7.0&#x00A0;mmol/L)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">2-Hour plasma glucose &#x2265;200&#x00A0;mg/dL (11.1&#x00A0;mmol/L) during a 75&#x00A0;g OGTT</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Random plasma glucose &#x2265;200&#x00A0;mg/dL (11.1&#x00A0;mmol/L) in a patient with symptoms of hyperglycemia</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">OGTT, oral glucose tolerance test.</p>
<p class="u_tfoot">Derived from Endocrine function. In: Barash PG, Cullen BF, Stoelting RK, et al, eds. <em>Handbook of Clinical Anesthesia</em>. 7th ed. Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott Williams &#x0026; Wilkins; 2013.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen286">E. Anesthetic Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Diabetes is associated with micro- and macrovascular disease, neuropathy, nephropathy, retinopathy, and impaired wound healing.<sup><a href="ch018-sec07.xhtml#bib2">2</a>,<a href="ch018-sec07.xhtml#bib4">4</a></sup> Patients are particularly prone to coronary artery disease, cerebrovascular disease, and peripheral vascular disease. They have a higher incidence of perioperative major adverse cardiovascular events. Management of an oral hypoglycemic <a id="page398"></a>and insulin regimen is of particular concern in the perioperative period, as nil per os status significantly impacts exogenous glucose consumption (<strong><a href="#tt18-16">Table 18.16</a></strong>). Oral hypoglycemics are typically not administered on the day of surgery and withheld until the patient resumes eating. The insulin regimen has to be modified in the perioperative period. Patients who take both morning and evening doses of insulin should take their usual evening dose of short-acting insulin, but reduce their intermediate- or long acting insulin dose by 20%, the night before surgery. On the morning of surgery, they should omit their morning dose of short-acting insulin and reduce intermediate- or long acting insulin dose by 50% (as long as glucose is greater than 120 mg/dL).</p>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt18-16"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;18.16</span> Diabetes Mellitus Preoperative Evaluation</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">History and physical examination (detect symptoms of cerebrovascular disease, coronary artery disease, peripheral neuropathy)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Laboratory tests (electrocardiography; blood glucose, creatinine, and potassium levels; urinalysis [glucose, ketones, albumin])</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Evidence of stiff joint syndrome (may signal difficult intubation)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Evidence of cardiac autonomic nervous system neuropathy (resting tachycardia, orthostatic hypotension)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Evidence of vagal autonomic nervous system neuropathy (gastroparesis slows emptying of solids but probably not clear fluids)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Autonomic neuropathy predisposes the patient to intraoperative hypothermia</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">Derived from Endocrine function. In: Barash PG, Cullen BF, Stoelting RK, et al, eds. <em>Handbook of Clinical Anesthesia</em>. 7th ed. Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott Williams &#x0026; Wilkins; 2013.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">Initially, tight intraoperative glucose control was advocated by some experts. However, subsequent studies demonstrated no significant benefit of tight glucose control (80-110&#x00A0;mg/dL) when compared with modest control (140-180&#x00A0;mg/dL). Owing to an increased risk of hypoglycemia obscured by the effects of anesthesia, tight glucose control is no longer advocated. Frequent glucose monitoring is recommended to prevent inadvertent hypoglycemia (<strong><a href="#tt18-17">Table 18.17</a></strong>).</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Type 1 diabetics require exogenous insulin during surgery to prevent ketoacidosis. A basal insulin infusion (0.5-2 units/h) in combination with a slow glucose infusion (5% dextrose in water at 75-125&#x00A0;mL/h) is commonly employed.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen287">F. Diabetic Emergencies</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Severe hypoglycemia (blood glucose &#x003C;60&#x00A0;mg/dL) requires a rapid response.<sup><a href="ch018-sec07.xhtml#bib4">4</a>,<a href="ch018-sec07.xhtml#bib12">12</a></sup> Anesthetic drugs and adjuvants (eg, beta-blockers) can obscure the signs of a hypoglycemic reaction (<strong><a href="#tt18-17">Table 18.17</a></strong>).</p>
<p class="indent">Two other life-threatening emergencies are encountered in diabetic patients. Lack of insulin leads to poor utilization of glucose by insulin-dependent tissues, and the body responds by generating alternative sources of energy. Breakdown of lipids leads to the formation and accumulation of ketoacids, which causes severe metabolic acidosis in the setting of hyperglycemia. This condition is called <strong><em>diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA)</em></strong> and it is a metabolic emergency. It carries a significant mortality if not recognized and treated promptly. Management consists of brisk fluid administration and exogenous insulin therapy.</p>
<p class="indent">Severe hyperglycemia (&#x003E;600&#x00A0;mg/dL) <strong><em>without</em></strong> ketoacidosis can also occur (<strong><em>hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state</em></strong> or <strong><em>hyperglycemic nonketotic coma</em></strong>). This condition typically presents in older type 2 diabetics who produce enough<a id="page399"></a> insulin to blunt fat breakdown and the formation of ketones. The body requires only one-tenth the amount of insulin to prevent lipolysis and ketone production as it does to stimulate glucose utilization. Although metabolic acidosis due to ketoacids does not occur, osmotic diuresis, fluid and electrolyte disturbances, and severe hyperosmolarity lead to altered mental status leading to coma. Treatment involves hydration followed by insulin therapy.</p>
<p class="indent">Diabetic ketoacidosis and hyperosmotic hyperglycemic state should be treated prior to elective surgery. Anesthetic implications of diabetic emergencies are detailed in <strong><a href="#tt18-17">Table 18.17</a></strong>.</p>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt18-17"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;18.17</span> Treatment of Diabetic Emergencies</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong><em>Hypoglycemia</em></strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Treatment:</strong> Moderate to severe hypoglycemia: Dextrose 25&#x00A0;g IV (1 amp D<sub>50</sub>W) followed by D<sub>5</sub>W or D<sub>10</sub>W. Continue to monitor and treat blood glucose until &#x003E;100&#x00A0;mg/dL. If no IV, glucagon 1&#x00A0;mg intramuscular.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong><em>Nonketotic Hyperosmolar Coma</em></strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Treatment:</strong> Significant fluid and electrolyte replacement, insulin therapy after 1-2 L of fluid replacement. Monitor for hemodynamic instability. Mental status improves slowly. (regular insulin).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong><em>Diabetic Ketoacidosis</em></strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Treatment:</strong> 10 U IV of regular insulin followed by a continuous IV infusion (insulin in U/h&#x00A0;=&#x00A0;blood glucose/150)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">IV fluids (isotonic) as guided by vital signs and urine output (anticipate a 4- to 10-L deficit)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">10-40 mEq/h IV of potassium chloride when urine output exceeds 0.5&#x00A0;mL/kg/h</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Glucose 5% 100&#x00A0;mL/h when serum glucose concentration decreases to &#x003C;250&#x00A0;mg/dL</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Consider IV sodium bicarbonate to correct pH below 6.9</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">IV, intravenous.</p>
<p class="u_tfoot">Derived from Endocrine function. In: Barash PG, Cullen BF, Stoelting RK, et al, eds. <em>Handbook of Clinical Anesthesia</em>. 7th ed. Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott Williams &#x0026; Wilkins; 2013.</p>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>