<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec61">III. Novel Nonopioid Analgesics and Future Directions</h4>
<ul class="bblue"><li><span>Tetrahydrocannabinol</span></li>
<li><span>Esmolol</span></li>
<li><span>Tricyclic antidepressants</span></li>
<li><span>Anticonvulsants</span></li></ul>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen128">A. Cannabinoids</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Cannabis plants have been grown and used throughout the world for thousands of years. Medical cannabis use has increased, and patients and providers cite chronic pain as the most common reason to use cannabis. Cannabis can be inhaled or ingested. Animal models have shed light on the analgesic effects of<a id="page195"></a> cannabinoids, which include inhibiting the release of neurotransmitters from presynaptic terminals, modulation of postsynaptic neurons, and activation of descending inhibitory pathways. Cannabinoids may act on multiple native targets including cannabinoid receptor 1 and cannabinoid receptor 2. These are G-protein&#x2013;coupled receptors and ligand-gated ion channels in the peripheral and central nervous systems. The main component of cannabis is <strong><em>delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol</em></strong> (THC), which contributes to the psychoactive effects of cannabis. <strong><em>Cannabidiol</em></strong> is a nonpsychoactive analogue of THC that possesses analgesic effects. Cannabinoid receptor activation in the CNS causes undesirable side effects including cognitive impairment. Large, longitudinal trials have not been performed; therefore, there is no accepted ideal dose or duration of cannabinoid use.<sup><a href="ch010-sec04.xhtml#bib13">13</a></sup> There are two synthetic cannabinoids currently marketed: dronabinol and nabilone. These two medications are FDA approved for the treatment of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen129">B. Esmolol</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Esmolol use perioperatively has been studied as a synergistic analgesic. Research has shown that esmolol decreases postoperative pain scores and intraoperative opioid use and mitigates opioid-induced hyperalgesia. The mechanisms have not been elucidated. Theories exist as to how perioperative esmolol may contribute to antinociception; for example, the <em>&#x03B2;</em>-receptor effects may blunt sympathetic arousal transmission.<sup><a href="ch010-sec04.xhtml#bib14">14</a></sup> Intraoperative esmolol infusions may contribute to less postoperative pain, but larger studies are needed to further evaluate this correlation and explore esmolol&#x2019;s ability to potentiate analgesia.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen130">C. Antidepressants</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Tricyclic antidepressants and serotonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, such as duloxetine, are more efficacious as analgesics than selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. These medications inhibit neuropathic pain in animal models and are front-line drugs for fibromyalgia. The analgesic effects on chronic pain manifest within a week of use, whereas the effects on depression take 2 to 4&#x00A0;weeks. Norepinephrine reuptake inhibition enhances analgesic effects through <em>&#x03B1;</em><sub>2</sub>-adrenergic receptors in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. Nortriptyline, a tricyclic antidepressant, is better tolerated than amitriptyline for the treatment of neuropathic pain.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen131">D. Anticonvulsants</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Anticonvulsants are commonly used to treat neuropathic pain. They work via voltage- and ligand-gated ion channels in central pain pathways. Gabapentin and pregabalin inhibit voltage-gated calcium channels. Patients who receive anticonvulsants as analgesics or adjuvants for a prolonged period should not have these medications abruptly discontinued as this can precipitate a withdrawal syndrome and seizures. In 2019, the FDA issued a warning regarding respiratory depression with gabapentinoid use and risk of respiratory depression when used in combination with opioids.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>