<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec101">IV. Myasthenia Gravis</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Myasthenia gravis (MG) is a neuromuscular autoimmune disease characterized by skeletal muscle weakness worsened by exertion and improved with rest. Extraocular muscles are affected primarily, with less frequent impact on limb and respiratory muscles strength.</p>
<p class="indent">The etiology is a decrease in the number of functional postsynaptic, acetylcholine receptors (AChRs) in the neuromuscular junction available for acetylcholine binding. Direct antibody receptor blockade, increased antibody-mediated receptor turnover, and postsynaptic membrane complement&#x2013;mediated injury can contribute to AChR decline. Abnormal thymus tissue is frequently involved.</p>
<p class="indent">Signs include ptosis, blurred vision, diplopia, dysphagia, dysarthria, and generalized limb weakness. <strong><em>Myasthenic crisis</em></strong> is a progression to severe muscle weakness and respiratory failure, usually requiring ventilatory support. Cardiac abnormalities include bundle branch blocks, atrial fibrillation, and focal myocarditis.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">The newborn of a mother with myasthenia gravis can suffer from a condition known as transient neonatal myasthenia, which may present with feeding problems and respiratory distress at birth.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent"><strong><em>Transient neonatal myasthenia</em></strong> is known to occur in newborns of women with active MG, with feeding problems and respiratory distress immediately postpartum. Edrophonium testing is used to diagnosis MG with high sensitivity. Serologic testing, tomographic imaging, and electrophysiological testing comprise a comprehensive MG workup. Treatment is aimed at both symptom management and immunomodulation.</p>
<p class="indent">Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, such as pyridostigmine, minimize MG symptoms by increasing the acetylcholine available at neuromuscular junction sites. Excessive drug administration can result in severe cholinergic side effects, or <strong><em>cholinergic crisis</em></strong>, characterized by hypersalivation, abdominal cramping, bradycardia, and weakness. Plasmapheresis and intravenous immunoglobulin can provide short-term relief. Chronic therapy includes steroids and nonsteroidal immunosuppressants. <strong><em>Thymectomy</em></strong> is recommended for MG patients with thymomas.<sup><a href="ch017-sec10.xhtml#bib3">3</a></sup></p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">The Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome is associated with small cell lung cancer, and in contrast to myasthenia gravis, exercise might improve the muscle weakness-related symptoms.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen248">A. Myasthenic Syndrome (Lambert-Eaton Syndrome)</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS) is an autoimmune, neuromuscular disorder of transmission mediated by antibodies to voltage-gated calcium channels at the presynaptic, motor nerve terminal, resulting in acetylcholine release reduction. It is characterized by proximal limb weakness, autonomic dysfunction such as dry mouth, and diminished deep tendon reflexes. In contrast to MG, exercise in LEMS might suddenly improve symptoms. LEMS is a paraneoplastic condition, often associated with small cell lung cancer. Increasing presynaptic, neurotransmitter release with 3,4-diaminopyridine is considered the mainstay of treatment.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>