<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec100">III. Familial Periodic Paralysis</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Channelopathies are a heterogenous group of defects in ion channel function that result in a spectrum of anomalies. Familial periodic paralysis is a subgroup of inherited defects comprising hyperkalemic and hypokalemic periodic paralysis.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Hypokalemic periodic paralysis is the most common periodic paralysis disease, characterized by recurrent episodes of hypokalemia-related flaccid paralysis, which can last hours to days.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen245">A. Hyperkalemic Periodic Paralysis</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis is an autosomal-dominant inherited disease characterized by episodes of hyperkalemia-related muscle weakness and myotonia. The episodes are triggered by transient hyperkalemia from exercise, fasting, or consumption of potassium-rich foods.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen246">B. Hypokalemic Periodic Paralysis</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Hypokalemic periodic paralysis, the most common periodic paralysis disease, is an autosomal dominant disease characterized by recurrent episodes of hypokalemia-related flaccid paralysis, lasting hours to days. Respiratory insufficiency and cardiac arrhythmias can occur during acute attacks. Chronic proximal myopathy is a common outcome in many cases.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen247">C. Management of Anesthesia</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Potassium homeostasis is the goal of perioperative management. Electrolyte levels should be monitored and corrected with an emphasis on avoiding metabolic states or medications that may alter serum potassium levels, either directly or indirectly. Nondepolarizing muscle relaxants are best avoided due to unpredictable patient sensitivities. Succinylcholine should be avoided, because it may cause transient hyperkalemia.<sup><a href="ch017-sec10.xhtml#bib2">2</a></sup></p>
<a id="page366"></a>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Myasthenia gravis is caused by a decrease in the number of functional postsynaptic, acetylcholine receptors in the neuromuscular junction available for acetylcholine binding.</p>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>