<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/jquery.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
<!--<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-1.10.2.min.js'></script>-->
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-migrate-1.2.1.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery.qtip.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/etext.js'></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec107">X. Skin Disorders</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen267">A. Epidermolysis Bullosa</h5>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><em>Epidermolysis bullosa (EB)</em></strong> is a group of rare, acquired, and inherited skin disorders that result in epidermal fragility due to abnormalities in basement membrane integrity within skin and mucosa. Shear stress across skin can result<a id="page376"></a> in epidermal layer detachment and painful bullae formation. Multiorgan dysfunction, such as cardiomyopathy, may develop depending on EB subtype. Esophageal strictures can be disabling, leading to malnutrition and dysphagia. Patients with EB are at risk for secondary bacterial infection and squamous cell carcinoma.<sup><a href="#bib9">9</a></sup></p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen268">B. Pemphigus Vulgaris</h5>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><em>Pemphigus vulgaris (PV)</em></strong> is an autoimmune skin disorder that results in keratinocytes adhesion loss due to antibodies directed at desmoglein-1 and -3. The disorder is characterized by painful, epidermal blistering that develops immediately after minimal skin rubbing. This hypersensitivity reaction can be triggered by many medications, such as angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, nifedipine, and penicillin. Painful, oral lesions are common. Corticosteroids are effective therapy for PV.</p>
<p class="BIBLIOGRAPHYpTitle">References</p>
<ol class="ref"><li id="bib1">Segura LG, Lorenz JD, Weingarten TN, et al. Anesthesia and Duchenne or Becker muscular dystrophy: review of 117 anesthetic exposures. <em>Paediatr Anaesth</em>. 2013;23(9):855-864.</li>
<li id="bib2">Bandschapp O, Iaizzo PA. Pathophysiologic and anesthetic considerations for patients with myotonia congenita or periodic paralyses. <em>Paediatr Anaesth</em>. 2013;23(9):824-833.</li>
<li id="bib3">Blichfeldt-Lauridsen L, Hansen BD. Anesthesia and myasthenia gravis. <em>Acta Anaesthesiol Scand</em>. 2012;56(1):17-22.</li>
<li id="bib4">Turakhia P, Barrick B, Berman J. Pre-operative management of the patient with chronic disease: patients with neuromuscular disorder. <em>Med Clin North Am</em>. 2013;97(6):1015-1032.</li>
<li id="bib5">Shorvon S. The historical evolution of, and the paradigms shifts in, the therapy of convulsive status epilepticus over the past 150 years. <em>Epilepsia</em>. 2013;54(6):64-67.</li>
<li id="bib6">Seitz DP, Shah PS, Herrmann N, Beyene J, Siddiqui N. Exposure to general anesthesia and risk of Alzheimer&#x2019;s disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. <em>BMC Geriatr</em>. 2011;11:83.</li>
<li id="bib7">Stowell KM. DNA testing for malignant hyperthermia: the reality and the dream. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2014;118(2):397-406.</li>
<li id="bib8">Samanta R, Shoukrey K, Griffiths R. Rheumatoid arthritis and anaesthesia. <em>Anaesthesia</em>. 2011;66(12):1146-1159.</li>
<li id="bib9">Nandi R, Howard R. Anesthesia and epidermolysis bullosa. <em>Dermatol Clin</em>. 2010;28(2):319-324.</li></ol>
<a id="page377"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp17_1" onclick="openLinkInNewTab('https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_caf/17_Malignant_Hyperthermia/story.html');">Infographic 17.1 A Closer Look at Malignant Hyperthermia  <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<a id="page378"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp17_2" onclick="openLinkInNewTab('https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/17A_Coexisting_Diseases_Impacting_Anesthetic_Management/index.html');">Interactive Video Lecture 17a. Coexisting Diseases Impacting Anesthetic Management <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<a id="page379"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp17_3" onclick="openLinkInNewTab('https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/17B_Coexisting_Diseases_Impacting_Anesthetic_Management/index.html');">Interactive Video Lecture 17b. Coexisting Diseases Impacting Anesthetic Management <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>