<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec95">IV. Preparation for Anesthesia</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen235">A. Fasting Guidelines</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Preoperative fasting is the mainstay of preparation for anesthesia and is designed mainly for minimizing the risk of pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents. Pulmonary aspiration is estimated to occur in 1 in 3000 to 1 in 6000 elective anesthetics but up to 1 in 600 emergency anesthetics. Risk factors for aspiration include emergency surgery, obesity, difficult airway, reflux, hiatal hernia, and inadequate anesthesia. The ASA has developed the &#x201C;Practice Guidelines for Preoperative Fasting and Pharmacologic Intervention<a id="page354"></a> for Prevention of Perioperative Aspiration: Application to Healthy Patients Undergoing Elective Procedures&#x201D; (<strong><a href="ch016-sec05.xhtml#tt16-15">Table 16.15</a></strong>).<sup><a href="ch016-sec06.xhtml#bib36">36</a></sup> These guidelines advise that clear liquids should be stopped at least 2 hours prior to surgery, breast milk at least 4 hours, and nonhuman milk and solids at least 6 hours before surgery. Examples of clear liquids include water, tea, black coffee, and fruit juices without pulp. Fried or fatty foods should be stopped at least 8 hours prior to surgery, as these require longer gastric emptying times. Note that these guidelines may need modification in patients with comorbidities affecting gastric emptying or gastric volume.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen236">B. Pharmacologic Agents to Reduce the Risk of Pulmonary Aspiration</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Routine use of drugs to prevent pulmonary aspiration is not advised, but they are effective when used in patients with risk factors for pulmonary aspiration. Several agents with varying mechanisms of action are available (<strong><a href="ch016-sec05.xhtml#tt16-16">Table 16.16</a></strong>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>