<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec81">IV. Levosimendan</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Myofilament Ca<sup>2+</sup> sensitizers are positive inotropic, vasodilating drugs that enhance myocardial contractility by increasing the Ca<sup>2+</sup> sensitivity of the contractile apparatus. Levosimendan (<strong><a href="ch013-sec03.xhtml#tt13-2">Table 13.2</a></strong>) is the only drug in this class that is used clinically for short-term treatment of heart failure or inotropic support in patients undergoing cardiac surgery. Levosimendan exerts its positive inotropic and vasodilator actions through three major mechanisms. First, levosimendan binds to TnC and stabilizes the Ca<sup>2+</sup>-bound conformation of the regulatory protein in a Ca<sup>2+</sup>-dependent manner. This action prolongs the interaction between actin and myosin filaments and enhances the rate and extent of myocyte contraction to increase myocardial contractility. The Ca<sup>2+</sup> dependence of levosimendan-TnC binding prevents relaxation abnormalities that would otherwise be expected to occur. Second, levosimendan is a potent PDE III inhibitor that produces positive inotropic and lusitropic effects and causes systemic, pulmonary, and coronary vasodilation. Finally, levosimendan opens ATP-dependent K<sup>+</sup> (K<sub>ATP</sub>) channels, which contribute to the drug&#x2019;s vasodilator properties and may also produce the additional benefit of myocardial protection against ischemic injury. Levosimendan decreases LV filling pressures,<a id="page275"></a> mean arterial pressure, and pulmonary and systemic vascular resistances and increases cardiac output in patients with heart failure. The modest reductions in arterial pressure observed with levosimendan are similar to those produced by milrinone and usually respond to volume administration. Levosimendan causes only minimal increases in heart rate and myocardial oxygen consumption in patients with heart failure. The drug also improves cardiac performance concomitant with reductions in pulmonary capillary occlusion pressure and systemic vascular resistance in patients with normal and depressed LV systolic function undergoing cardiac surgery. Levosimendan has a biologically active metabolite that contributes to the parent drug&#x2019;s more prolonged hemodynamic effects compared with catecholamines or milrinone. Use of levosimendan is more common in Europe than in the United States.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>