<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec82">V. Vasopressin</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone; <strong><a href="ch013-sec03.xhtml#tt13-2">Table 13.2</a></strong>) is a peptide hormone released from the posterior pituitary that regulates water reabsorption in the kidney and exerts potent hemodynamic effects independent of adrenergic receptors. Vasopressin receptors consist of three subtypes (V<sub>1</sub>, V<sub>2</sub>, and V<sub>3</sub>), all of which are five-subunit helical membrane proteins coupled to G-proteins. Vasopressin&#x2019;s cardiovascular effects are predominately mediated through V<sub>1</sub> receptors, which are located in the cell membrane of vascular smooth muscle. Activation of the V<sub>1</sub> receptor subtype stimulates phospholipase C and triggers hydrolysis of inositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP<sub>2</sub>) to inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP<sub>3</sub>) and diacylglycerol. These second messengers increase intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> concentration and produce contraction of the vascular smooth muscle cell. V<sub>2</sub> receptors are present on renal collecting duct cells and, when activated, increase reabsorption of free water, whereas the V<sub>3</sub> receptors are located in the pituitary gland and act as autacoid modulators.</p>
<p class="indent">Along with the sympathetic nervous system and renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis, endogenous vasopressin plays a crucial role in the maintenance of arterial pressure. Exogenous administration of vasopressin does not substantially affect arterial pressure in conscious, healthy patients because activation of central V<sub>1</sub> receptors in the area postrema increases baroreceptor reflex&#x2013;mediated inhibition of efferent sympathetic nervous outflow that counterbalances the elevated system vascular resistance resulting from V<sub>1</sub>-induced arterial vasoconstriction. In contrast, vasopressinergic mechanisms are essential for maintaining arterial pressure under conditions in which sympathetic nervous system or renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis dysfunction is present. Indeed, exogenous administration of vasopressin has been shown to effectively support arterial pressure when there is a relative vasopressin deficiency (eg, catecholamine-refractory hypotension, vasodilatory shock, sepsis, cardiac arrest). Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers used to treat hypertension also affect autonomic nervous system and renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis function. Intraoperative hypotension that is relatively refractory to administration of catecholamines or sympathomimetics has been repeatedly described in patients who are treated with these medications. General or neuraxial anesthesia also reduces sympathetic nervous system tone, resulting in decreased plasma stress hormone concentrations including vasopressin. Under these circumstances, administration of vasopressin activates V<sub>1</sub> vascular smooth muscle receptors and rapidly increases arterial<a id="page276"></a> pressure during anesthesia by causing arterial vasoconstriction. Vasopressin therapy has been shown to reduce mortality associated with acute vasodilatory states such as anaphylaxis. In addition, infusion of vasopressin is indicated for the treatment of severe hypotension after prolonged cardiopulmonary bypass in patients who are otherwise unresponsive to phenylephrine or norepinephrine (vasoplegia).</p>
<p class="indent">Vasopressin is a useful drug for the treatment of sepsis. Vasodilation that is refractory to fluid resuscitation combined with a relative deficiency of endogenous vasopressin is a characteristic feature of sepsis. Inadequate sympathetic nervous system and renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis responses to hypotension are also present in sepsis. Administration of vasopressin in the absence or presence of other vasoactive medications often improves hemodynamics and facilitates survival in patients with sepsis. The combined use of vasopressin with other vasoactive medications often reduces the overall dose of vasopressin required to maintain arterial pressure, thereby limiting the adverse effects of vasopressin on organ perfusion. In fact, sustained administration of higher doses of vasopressin may produce mesenteric ischemia, peripheral vascular insufficiency, and cardiac arrest because the drug causes pronounced vasoconstriction of cutaneous, skeletal muscle, splanchnic, and coronary vascular beds concomitant with reduced perfusion of and oxygen delivery to these tissues.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>