<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec90">II. Common Additional Monitors</h4>
<p class="nonindent">In addition to the standard monitoring for anesthesia care previously mentioned, a few other monitors are commonly used during anesthesia.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen218">A. Urine Output</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Adequate production of urine is often used as a surrogate marker for adequate perfusion to the rest of the body. Therefore, during major surgery, or even minor surgery of long duration, a urinary (Foley) catheter is often placed to measure urine output. Many anesthesia providers will target 0.5 mL/kg/h of urine production as a sign of adequate overall body perfusion, although the significance of urine output below this threshold has been questioned. Although urine output is not a good monitor of blood volume, intraoperative oliguria or anuria should be taken seriously and investigated in the context of the overall clinical picture.</p>
<a id="page319"></a>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen219">B. Neuromuscular Blockade</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Pharmacologically induced <strong><em>muscle paralysis</em></strong> during anesthesia and major surgery is common, because muscle paralysis facilitates tracheal intubation and may improve operating conditions. The degree of neuromuscular blockade is usually assessed by stimulation of a peripheral nerve and subsequent measurement of the muscle response. Varying sites for measurement are available (<strong><a href="ch015-sec03.xhtml#tt15-8">Table 15.8</a></strong>) as well as various stimulation patterns.<sup><a href="ch015-sec03.xhtml#bib7">7</a>,<a href="ch015-sec03.xhtml#bib8">8</a></sup> Assessment may be visual, tactile, or more accurately measured using a quantitative device such as accelerometry. The most commonly used stimulation pattern is the <strong><em>train-of-four (TOF):</em></strong> Each train consists of four stimuli (T1, T2, T3, T4) applied at 2 Hz (two twitches per second). With increasing nondepolarizing neuromuscular blockade, the &#x201C;height&#x201D; or amplitude of the twitch response decreases, and each twitch in the TOF sequence has a smaller height than the one before it. The TOF ratio, which is the ratio of the amplitude of the fourth and first twitches (T4/T1), should be &#x003E;0.9 at the end of surgery for neuromuscular blockade to be considered fully reversed (see <strong><a href="ch015-sec03.xhtml#ff15-8">Figure 15.8</a></strong> and <a href="ch011.xhtml">Chapter 11</a>). Monitoring the level of neuromuscular blockade during anesthesia is important not only for optimizing operating conditions but also for avoiding postoperative weakness. Residual and often subclinical muscle weakness following reversal of neuromuscular blockade is surprisingly common, and it is a significant contributing factor to postoperative adverse respiratory events.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Postoperative residual neuromuscular blockade is quite common and is associated with postoperative respiratory events.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen220">C. Neurologic Monitoring</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Monitoring the <strong><em>electrical activity of the brain</em></strong> via a processed electroencephalogram (ie, BIS monitor, Aspect Medical Systems, Norwood, MA) has become a common way to measure the depth of general anesthesia. The <strong><em>bispectral index</em></strong> (<strong><em>BIS</em></strong>) is a dimensionless number between 0 and 100, with different ranges purported to correlate with different stages of alertness (<strong><a href="ch015-sec03.xhtml#tt15-9">Table 15.9</a></strong>). The main goal of the BIS monitor is to guide titration of anesthetic depth and thereby decrease the risk of intraoperative awareness; however, studies are conflicting as to the ability of the BIS monitor to accomplish this goal.<sup><a href="ch015-sec03.xhtml#bib9">9</a></sup></p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>