<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec105">VIII. Anemias</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen259">A. Nutritional Deficiency Anemias</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Nutritional deficiency anemias are due to an insufficiency of any food component necessary for growth and development, with complex vitamin B and iron deficiencies being the most common. Megaloblastic anemia is a characteristic of folate and vitamin B12 (cobalamin) deficiencies. <strong><em>Folate deficiency</em></strong> is associated with malnutrition, chronic alcohol abuse, and medications that interfere<a id="page372"></a> with folate metabolism. Clinically evident <strong><em>cobalamin deficiency</em></strong> presents with signs of demyelinating disease. Features include peripheral neuropathy with lower extremity loss of proprioception and vibratory sensation. Clinically evident cobalamin deficiency is most often due to <strong><em>pernicious anemia</em></strong>, an autoimmune loss of intrinsic factor from gastric parietal cells needed for cobalamin binding. Nitrous oxide exposure can interfere with cobalamin metabolism in susceptible patients. <strong><em>Iron deficiency</em></strong> leads to a microcytic, hypochromic anemia, associated with poor iron intake, impaired iron absorption, chronic blood loss, or systemic inflammation. Treatment for all three nutritional deficiency anemias entails supplementation and reversal of contributing causes.</p>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt17-1"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;17.1</span> Types of Glycogen Storage Diseases</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:33%;"></col>
<col style="width:33%;"></col>
<col style="width:34%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Type</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Enzyme Mutation</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Clinical Features</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Type I (von Gierke disease)</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Glucose-6-phosphatase deficiency</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Hypoglycemia, acidosis, and seizures</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Type II (Pompe disease)</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Lysosomal acid glucosidase deficiency</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Infantile; cardiac infiltrative cardiomyopathy</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Type III (Forbes or Cori disease)</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Glycogen debranching enzyme deficiency</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Hepatomegaly, muscle weakness, and cardiomyopathy</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Type IV (Andersen disease)</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Branching enzyme deficiency</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Hepatosplenomegaly, cirrhosis, cardiomyopathy, hypotonia, and failure to thrive</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Type V (McArdle disease)</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Muscle glycogen phosphorylase deficiency</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Rhabdomyolysis and myoglobinuria after exercise or succinylcholine</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Type VI (Hers disease)</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Hepatic phosphorylase deficiency</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Benign; mild hypoglycemia, hepatomegaly</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Type VII (Tarui disease)</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Muscle phosphofructokinase deficiency</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Muscle cramps, exercise intolerance, and episodic myoglobinuria</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Type IX</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Hepatic glycogen phosphorylase kinase deficiency</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Hypotonia, short stature, and exertional myoglobinuria</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Type XI (Fanconi-Bickel syndrome)</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Glucose transporter enzyme deficiency</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Hepatomegaly, fasting hypoglycemia, short stature, and proximal renal tubular acidosis</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Type O</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Hepatic glycogen synthase deficiency</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Severe fasting ketotic hypoglycemia, short stature, seizures, and severe developmental delay</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen260">B. Hemolytic Anemias</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Hemolytic anemias are any inherited or acquired anemias caused by hemolysis of red blood cells (RBCs). The common presenting features of all hemolytic anemias are jaundice, splenomegaly, increased reticulocyte count, and hyperbilirubinemia. <strong><em>Hereditary spherocytosis</em></strong> is an inherited disorder characterized by fragile, spherical RBCs that are prone to rupture during transit and spleen sequestration. Another manifestation is cholelithiasis. Treatment recommendations include splenectomy, antipneumococcal vaccination presplenectomy, and prophylactic cholecystectomy.</p>
<p class="indent"><strong><em>Immune hemolytic anemias</em></strong> can be caused by autoimmunity, alloimmunity, and drug reactions. <strong><em>Autoimmune hemolytic anemias (AIHAs)</em></strong> can be caused primarily, usually idiopathic, or secondarily, which is divided into warm and<a id="page373"></a> cold agglutinin diseases. Warm AIHA can be caused by leukemias, lymphomas, scleroderma, and rheumatoid arthritis. Cold AIHA can be triggered by infections and cold temperature exposure. <strong><em>Drug-induced immune hemolysis anemias</em></strong> can be subdivided into type II and type III hypersensitivity reactions. Penicillin and <em>&#x03B1;</em>-methyldopa can result in a type II reaction, where the drug binds to RBCs, triggering antibody-mediated destruction. Drugs known to potentially trigger a type III immune complex reaction include cephalosporins, hydrochlorothiazides, isoniazid, and tetracycline. Hemolytic disease of the newborn, or Rh incompatibility, is the most recognized example of an <strong><em>alloimmunity hemolytic disease</em></strong>.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen261">C. Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) is an ubiquitous, X-linked maintenance enzyme present in RBCs and other cell types, which is essential to the pentose phosphate pathway that generates nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate for oxidative stress resistance. An acute, nonimmune hemolytic anemia reaction to ordinary infections, medications, or fava bean ingestion may be the presenting sign of G6PD deficiency. Aminoester local anesthetics and nitroprusside may trigger <strong><em>methemoglobinemia</em></strong> in patients with G6PD deficiency.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen262">D. Hemoglobinopathies</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Hemoglobinopathies are a group of predominantly genetic RBC diseases caused by aberrant hemoglobin production. Sickle cell disease and thalassemia are the most clinically relevant hemoglobinopathies. <strong><em>Sickle cell disease (SCD)</em></strong> is caused by an autosomal recessive <em>&#x03B2;</em>-globin gene defect that leads to structurally abnormal hemoglobin, called hemoglobin-S (HbS). RBCs affected with HbS have a propensity for &#x201C;sickling&#x201D; and for premature destruction. SCD produces acute and chronic multisystem complications. Acute, painful, and life-threatening attacks of SCD, called <strong><em>sickle cell crisis</em></strong>, can occur spontaneously or be triggered by systemic stressors, such as dehydration, hypoxia, and infections.</p>
<p class="indent">Manifestations of sickle cell crisis include vaso-occlusive crisis, acute chest syndrome, splenic sequestration crisis, and aplastic crisis. Sickled RBCs clump together to obstruct capillaries and cause painful tissue ischemia and infarction, called a <strong><em>vaso-occlusive crisis</em></strong>. This is the most common complication of SCD. Treatment consists of intravenous opioids, fluid replacement, and blood transfusion. Acute chest syndrome is a life-threatening manifestation of SCD, where pulmonary inflammation or infection triggers localized pulmonary infarctions that progress to death without appropriate supportive therapy. Clinical signs include acute dyspnea, chest pain, cough, and hypoxia. Aggressive fluid therapy, intravenous opioids, and exchange transfusion should be instituted promptly. Severe hypoxia may require ventilatory support. <strong><em>Splenic sequestration crisis</em></strong> is an acute splenic enlargement from sequestered abnormal RBCs, resulting in severe abdominal pain, anemia, and hypotension. Treatment is mainly supportive with fluid therapy and blood transfusion. Parvovirus B19 infection, a predominantly pediatric disease, can trigger an <strong><em>aplastic crisis</em></strong> in adults with SCD, characterized by profound depression of erythropoiesis resulting in life-threatening anemia.</p>
<p class="indent">Prophylactic treatment in SCD with oral penicillin, pneumococcal vaccination, and hydroxyurea is intended to reduce infections and recurrence of sickle cell crises.</p>
<a id="page374"></a>
<p class="indent"><strong><em>Thalassemia</em></strong> is a diverse group of autosomal recessive disorders caused by insufficient <em>&#x03B1;</em>- or <em>&#x03B2;</em>-globin synthesis. The <em>&#x03B2;</em>-thalassemias in order of clinical severity include thalassemia major, thalassemia intermedia, and thalassemia minor. <strong><em>Thalassemia major</em></strong> usually presents by early childhood with anemia and failure to thrive. In time, young adult survivors go on to develop severe anemia, hypertrophic facial and long bone deformities, and secondary multiorgan dysfunction from severe transfusion-related hemochromatosis. Cardiac siderosis can lead to congestive heart failure and arrhythmias. Extensive endocrine dysfunction can present as hypopituitarism, hypothyroidism, hypoparathyroidism, diabetes, and adrenal insufficiency. Infections are common due to secondary immunodeficiency of hemochromatosis, blood-borne infections, and splenomegaly. Primary treatment includes periodic blood transfusions and iron chelating therapy.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>