<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec99">II. The Myotonias</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Myotonic dystrophy is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by gene mutations that lead to RNA toxicity, ion channel dysfunction, and myotonias or impaired skeletal muscle relaxation. Progressive muscle wasting with weakness combined with multisystem involvement characterizes this disorder. Myotonic dystrophy is divided into two chief genetic entities. Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1), the predominant major type, is subdivided into congenital, child, and<a id="page365"></a> adult onset. Myotonic dystrophy type 2 is rare, with a highly variable, late adult-onset presentation.</p>
<p class="indent">Adult-onset DM1, the most common subtype, is characterized by muscle weakness, myotonias, and cataracts. Facial, neck, and distal limb weakness progress to muscle wasting, immobility, and bulbar palsies. Respiratory dysfunction is compounded by aspiration and respiratory muscle weakness.</p>
<p class="indent">Functional and anatomical brain dysfunction is manifested by cognitive dysfunction and diffuse white matter atrophy. Systolic and diastolic cardiac failure are complicated by conduction defects, such as atrioventricular conduction blocks and tachyarrhythmias. <strong><em>Sudden cardiac death</em></strong> due to dysrhythmias is common. Gastrointestinal signs include constipation and diarrhea. Impaired endocrine function results in hypothyroidism and insulin resistance. Treatment is primarily supportive.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen244">A. Management of Anesthesia</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Cardiopulmonary abnormalities, muscle weakness, and clinical myotonia are the primary causes of perioperative risk in adult-onset DM1, regardless of anesthetic technique. Sedatives should be used with caution due to potential exaggerated response to their respiratory depression side effects. Succinylcholine should be avoided due to its potential to trigger a severe myotonic muscle contraction. Both nondepolarizing and reversal agents may exacerbate muscle weakness and should be avoided. Respiratory insufficiency can occur. Transcutaneous pacing pads should be considered.</p>
<p class="indent">There is potential for prolonged labor, postpartum hemorrhage, and congenital myotonic dystrophy of the neonate.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>