<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec76">IV. Toxicity of Local Anesthetics</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Clinically significant adverse effects of local anesthetics include <strong><em>local anesthetic systemic toxicity</em></strong> (LAST), local tissue toxicity, allergic reactions, and local anesthetic-specific effects. LAST results from excessive plasma concentrations of local anesthetic, either due to unintentional direct intravascular injection or from systemic absorption of larger doses of local anesthetics performed during peripheral nerve blocks, epidural anesthesia, or even large-volume infiltration (<strong><em>tumescent</em></strong>) anesthesia. As previously discussed, plasma concentration is determined by the balance between systemic absorption and elimination. Clinically significant symptoms of LAST manifest primarily in the CNS and cardiovascular system (CVS).</p>
<p class="video"><video data-id="E02dTPzN" controls="controls" class="jwp-video" crossorigin="anonymous" style="width:100%; height:auto; width:320px; height:240px;">Browser issues</video></p>
<p class="video1" id="vid12-1"><strong>VIDEO 12.1</strong></p>
<p class="video2"><strong>Local Anesthetic Reaction</strong></p>
<p class="indent">Risk factors for LAST include extremes of age, low muscle mass, female sex, pregnancy, or preexisting cardiac, neurologic, hepatic disease. The use of ultrasound guidance to direct local anesthetic administration during regional anesthesia has been shown to decrease the risk of LAST.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen183">A. Central Nervous System Toxicity</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Local anesthetics readily cross the blood-brain barrier and produce dose-dependent signs and symptoms of CNS toxicity. Initial symptoms may include drowsiness, circumoral numbness, facial tingling, restlessness, tinnitus, or auditory hallucinations. Objective signs of progressive CNS excitation may manifest as tremors or muscle twitching and can progress to generalized tonic-clonic convulsions.<sup><a href="ch012-sec06.xhtml#bib8">8</a></sup> If local anesthetic plasma levels are sufficiently elevated or the rate of rise is rapid, CNS excitation may progress to generalized CNS depression, leading to coma or respiratory or even cardiac arrest. The apparent biphasic pattern of CNS toxicity reflects neuronal depression by local anesthetics. At lower plasma concentrations, selective depression of cortical inhibitory neurons permits relatively unopposed actions of excitatory neurons, manifesting as CNS excitation. In contrast, markedly elevated plasma levels reflect the added inhibition of excitatory neurons and present clinically as profound CNS depression. The potential for CNS toxicity directly parallels the intrinsic potency of local anesthetics and can be augmented by various clinical factors. Untreated convulsions, for example, can rapidly cause both respiratory and metabolic acidosis, increasing the risk for CNS toxicity by decreasing plasma protein binding, increasing cerebral perfusion, and favoring intracellular trapping of the uncharged form of the local anesthetic.</p>
<a id="page253"></a>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen184">B. Cardiovascular System Toxicity</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Local anesthetic&#x2013;induced cardiovascular system (CVS) toxicity can lead to hemodynamic instability due to a combination of direct myocardial depression, direct arteriolar vasodilation, the potential to cause significant dysrhythmias, and impaired autonomic regulation of the CVS system. Classically, LAST was taught as a progression from CNS to CVS symptoms when significantly larger doses of local anesthetic were administered. However, recent case series and registries show frequent presentations of CVS toxicity without the presence of CNS toxicity; therefore, LAST should always be considered in any case of cardiovascular collapse in patients who have received local anesthetics.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Lipid-soluble local anesthetics (eg, bupivacaine) cause cardiovascular system toxicity by blocking cardiac voltage-gated sodium channels, resulting in cardiac conduction system abnormalities, including prolongation of the PR and QRS intervals, as well as more ominous ventricular dysrhythmias.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">Similar to CNS toxicity, the more potent lipid-soluble local anesthetics appear to have greater inherent CVS toxicity compared with the less potent local anesthetics. For example, the ratio of the dose required for irreversible CVS collapse relative to that required for CNS toxicity is much lower for bupivacaine than for lidocaine. Additionally, the more potent lipid soluble agents (eg, bupivacaine) produce a different pattern of CVS toxicity compared with the less potent agents. At progressively increasing plasma concentrations, all local anesthetics can cause hypotension, myocardial depression, and dysrhythmias. However, toxic levels of bupivacaine can result in sudden cardiovascular collapse caused by malignant ventricular dysrhythmias that are often resistant to traditional resuscitation protocols.</p>
<p class="indent">The more potent lipid-soluble local anesthetics display greater potential for direct electrophysiologic toxicity (prolongation of the PR and QRS intervals). Although all local anesthetics block the conduction system through a dose-dependent block of cardiac VG<sub>Na</sub>, several features of bupivacaine&#x2019;s Na<sup>+</sup> channel blocking abilities may enhance its CVS toxicity. First, bupivacaine exhibits a much stronger binding affinity to resting and inactivated cardiac VG<sub>Na</sub> compared with that for lidocaine. Second, although all local anesthetics bind to VG<sub>Na</sub> during systole and subsequently dissociate during diastole, bupivacaine dissociates much slowly compared with lidocaine. Bupivacaine dissociates slowly enough that there is inadequate time during diastole for complete recovery of VG<sub>Na</sub>, and conduction block accumulates with successive cardiac cycles.<sup><a href="ch012-sec06.xhtml#bib9">9</a></sup> In contrast, lidocaine completely dissociates with each cardiac cycle, and minimal accumulation of conduction block occurs. Lastly, bupivacaine displays a greater degree of direct myocardial depression compared with that for lidocaine or ropivacaine. Ropivacaine&#x2019;s safer CVS toxicity profile compared with that for bupivacaine stems from a combination of its slightly decreased potency due to its chemical structure (propyl alkyl substitution compared to butyl alkyl substitution on bupivacaine) as well as its formulation as the less cardiotoxic single <em>S</em>-enantiomer.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen185">C. Treatment of Local Anesthetic Systemic Toxicity</h5>
<p class="nonindent">LAST is best managed by preventing the occurrence of toxic plasma levels of local anesthetics by using the minimum effective dose required for a specific regional anesthetic technique, vigilance for inadvertent direct intravascular injection, and awareness of the early signs and symptoms of LAST. The basic treatment needed for CNS toxicity is initially supportive. Maintenance of adequate oxygenation and ventilation is mandatory, and if needed, the airway may be secured. Generalized tonic-clonic convulsions rapidly lead to metabolic acidosis, and their associated hypoventilation leads to hypoxemia and hypercapnea, all of which can potentiate LAST and exacerbate CNS toxicity. Convulsions that<a id="page254"></a> persist despite adequate oxygenation and ventilation should be promptly treated with titrated doses of the most readily available sedative hypnotic agent (such as midazolam [0.05-0.1&#x00A0;mg/kg] or propofol [0.5-1.5&#x00A0;mg/kg]).<sup><a href="ch012-sec06.xhtml#bib10">10</a></sup> Caution should be used when administering propofol due to its cardiac depressant effects, and it should be avoided if there is concern for CVS toxicity. If convulsions are not readily terminated with appropriate doses of sedative hypnotic agents, a neuromuscular blocker (typically succinylcholine) should be administered to terminate the intense muscular activity and attenuate worsening metabolic acidosis. It should be noted that neuromuscular blockade, however, does not decrease CNS excitation associated with CNS toxicity.</p>
<p class="indent">In the event of CVS toxicity, prompt attention should be turned to maintaining adequate oxygenation and, more important, coronary perfusion pressure. Local anesthetics themselves do not irreversibly damage cardiac myocytes. Experimental evidence demonstrates that with adequate coronary perfusion, bupivacaine promptly leaves cardiac tissue with a simultaneous return of normal cardiac function.</p>
<p class="indent"><strong><em>Intravenous lipid emulsion</em></strong> (ILE) can significantly attenuate bupivacaine-induced CVS toxicity as demonstrated by numerous case reports of successful rapid resuscitation with ILE administration in cases of severe CVS toxicity from both bupivacaine and ropivacaine.<sup><a href="ch012-sec06.xhtml#bib11">11</a></sup> Recent guidelines recommend administration of ILE early in the presentation or suspicion of a severe LAST event. The mechanism of action of intralipid is not completely elucidated but is thought to be mediated by (1) shuttling of local anesthetics from the heart and brain to muscle for temporary storage and the liver for detoxification, (2) cardiotonic effects including increased inotropy and peripheral vascular resistance, and (3) cardiac ischemic postconditioning. Dosing guidelines for ILE are shown in <strong><a href="#tt12-3">Table 12.3</a></strong>.</p>
<p class="indent">In the event of cardiac arrest due to LAST, standard advanced cardiac life support measures should be instituted with the following modifications: vasopressin is not recommended, smaller initial epinephrine dosing (&#x2264;1&#x00A0;&#x00B5;g/kg) is preferred, and if ventricular dysrhythmias develop, amiodarone is preferred instead of lidocaine. Cardiac bypass may be required in refractory cases to support perfusion until systemic levels of local anesthetic are reduced. Current recommendations call for monitoring patients for at least 2 hours after a limited CNS event or at least 4 to 6 hours after a significant CVS event.<sup><a href="ch012-sec06.xhtml#bib12">12</a></sup></p>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt12-3"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;12.3</span> Treatment of LAST With Lipid Emulsion</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:50%;"></col>
<col style="width:50%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="td3" colspan="2"><p class="tbodyc"><strong>Lipid Emulsion 20%</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Greater than 70&#x00A0;kg patient</p>
<p class="TbBL2"><span class="blu9">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Bolus 100&#x00A0;mL rapidly over 2-3 min</p>
<p class="TbBL2"><span class="blu9">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Start infusion of 200-250&#x00A0;mL over 15-20 min</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Less than 70&#x00A0;kg patient</p>
<p class="TbBL2"><span class="blu9">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Bolus 1.5&#x00A0;mL/kg rapidly over 2-3 min</p>
<p class="TbBL2"><span class="blu9">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Start infusion of approximately 0.25&#x00A0;mL/kg/min (ideal body weight)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3" colspan="2"><p class="tbodyleft">If patient remains unstable</p>
<p class="TbBL1"><span class="blu9">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Re-bolus once or twice at the same dose and double infusion rate; be aware of dosing limit (12&#x00A0;mL/kg)</p>
<p class="TbBL1"><span class="blu9">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Total volume of lipid emulsion can approach 1 L in a prolonged resuscitation</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">From Neal JM. The Third American Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine Practice Advisory on local anesthetic systemic toxicity: executive summary 2017. <em>Reg Anesth Pain Med</em>. 2018;43:113-123.</p>
</div>
<a id="page255"></a>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen186">D. Neural Toxicity and Myotoxicity</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Direct neural toxicity has been described with clinical application of multiple local anesthetic agents.<sup><a href="ch012-sec06.xhtml#bib13">13</a></sup> Case reports of cauda equina syndrome associated with the administration of high concentrations of lidocaine through spinal microcatheters began to appear in the late 1980s. Subsequent in vitro and in vivo investigations suggested that a combination of maldistribution (pooling) and high doses of local anesthetics led to neurotoxic concentrations localized to the lumbosacral subarachnoid space. Similarly, 2-chloroprocaine was associated with cauda equina syndrome in the 1980s, with the mechanism linked to the preservative used at that time (sodium metabisulfite) when large doses were accidentally administered into the subarachnoid space during attempted epidural administration. Subsequently, 2-chloroprocaine was reformulated as a preservative-free solution.</p>
<p class="indent">Transient neurologic symptoms (TNS) are associated with the subarachnoid administration of local anesthetics (most notably lidocaine) and characterized by transient pain or sensory abnormalities in the lower back radiating to the lower extremities and buttocks.<sup><a href="ch012-sec06.xhtml#bib13">13</a></sup> Additional risk factors for TNS include surgical lithotomy position and ambulatory surgical procedures. Overall, there appears to be a paucity of electrophysiologic evidence to support a direct neurotoxic mechanism for TNS. Furthermore, effective treatment modalities, such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or trigger point injections, indicate a myofascial rather than a neuropathic mechanism for TNS.</p>
<p class="indent">Local anesthetics have also been shown to cause direct toxic effects to muscle tissue, leading to destruction of myocytes.<sup><a href="ch012-sec06.xhtml#bib14">14</a></sup> Despite the predictable nature of muscle damage, local anesthetic myotoxicity is only rarely a clinical problem, as complete muscle regeneration typically occurs within 3 to 4&#x00A0;weeks. Risk factors include potency of the individual local anesthetic agent, direct intramuscular injection, and dose, which is exacerbated with serial or continuous administration. A notable exception to the generally low clinical consequence of local anesthetic myotoxicity is extraocular muscle damage, where there is a reported 0.25% incidence of prolonged extraocular muscle dysfunction (diplopia) after regional anesthesia for ocular surgery.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen187">E. Allergic Reactions</h5>
<p class="nonindent">True immune-mediated allergic reactions to local anesthetics are rare. A careful history should be elucidated from patients with local anesthetic allergies as many reactions are secondary effects of epinephrine coadministered during dental or other procedures. When true allergies do occur, the vast majority are associated with aminoester local anesthetics, most likely due to their metabolism to the pure allergen PABA. Some preparations of aminoamide local anesthetics also contain methylparaben, which has a similar chemical structure to PABA and is the most likely cause of allergic reactions to aminoamide local anesthetics.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>