<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/jquery.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
<!--<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-1.10.2.min.js'></script>-->
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-migrate-1.2.1.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery.qtip.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/etext.js'></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec77">V. Local Anesthetic Agents and Their Common Clinical Applications</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen188">A. Aminoamide Local Anesthetics</h5>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>1. Lidocaine</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">Lidocaine was the first widely used local anesthetic and remains the most commonly used local anesthetic. It may be used for infiltration, intravenous regional anesthesia (Bier block), peripheral nerve block, and central neuraxial<a id="page256"></a> (subarachnoid and epidural) anesthesia. It is characterized by a rapid to intermediate onset of action and intermediate duration of action for peripheral nerve blocks and epidural anesthesia. Although concerns over TNS have led to decreased use for subarachnoid anesthesia, it remains popular for epidural anesthesia. Lidocaine may be applied topically as a jelly, an ointment, a patch, or in aerosol form to anesthetize the upper airway. Intravenous injections targeting relatively low plasma levels (&#x003C;5&#x00A0;&#x03BC;g/mL) produce systemic analgesia and have been used as an adjunct to blunt the sympathetic response to laryngoscopy and intubation. One of its most common uses involves intravenous injection to decrease the discomfort associated with intravenous administration of propofol. Lidocaine infusions have been administered to treat chronic neuropathic pain as well as acute postoperative pain. More recently, lidocaine (5% patch) was U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved for the treatment of chronic pain associated with neuropathic postherpetic neuralgia. The patch is a topical delivery system designed to deliver low doses of lidocaine to superficially involved nociceptors in an amount that produces analgesia devoid of sensorimotor block.</p>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>2. Mepivacaine</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">Mepivacaine has a chemical structure combining the piperidine ring of cocaine with the xylidine ring of lidocaine. It shares a similar clinical profile to lidocaine but with a slightly longer duration of action because it results in less vasodilation and has a higher protein binding affinity. It is relatively ineffective when applied topically. As a spinal anesthetic agent, it appears to have a lower, although not clinically insignificant, incidence of TNS compared with that of lidocaine. Metabolism in the fetus and neonate is prolonged and, therefore, it is not used for obstetric analgesia.</p>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>3. Prilocaine</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">Prilocaine also has a similar clinical profile to lidocaine and is used for infiltration, peripheral nerve blocks, and spinal and epidural anesthesia. Due to its high clearance, it demonstrates the least systemic toxicity of all the amide local anesthetics and is therefore potentially useful for intravenous regional anesthesia. However, administration of higher doses (&#x003E;500-600&#x00A0;mg) may result in methemoglobinemia. Clinically significant methemoglobinemia may be effectively treated with intravenous administration of methylene blue (1-2&#x00A0;mg/kg). Nonetheless, concerns over methemoglobinemia and lack of FDA approval have limited more widespread clinical use.</p>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>4. Bupivacaine</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">Bupivacaine is a more lipid-soluble, structural homologue of mepivacaine due to a butyl group, rather than a methyl group, on its piperidine ring. Thus, it is characterized by a relatively slower onset compared with that of lidocaine, but it has an extended duration of action. It provides prolonged sensory anesthesia and analgesia that typically outlasts the duration and intensity of its motor block, especially with the use of lower concentrations in continuous infusions. This characteristic has established bupivacaine as the most widely used local anesthetic for labor epidural analgesia and for acute postoperative pain management. Single injections for peripheral nerve block applications may provide surgical anesthesia for up to 12 hours and sensory analgesia lasting as long as 24 hours. It is widely used for subarachnoid anesthesia, typically with duration of action of 2 to 3 hours and, in contrast to lidocaine or mepivacaine, it has rarely been associated with TNS.</p>
<a id="page257"></a>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>5. Ropivacaine</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">Ropivacaine is another structural homologue of mepivacaine and bupivacaine, but with a propyl group on its piperidine ring, and it is also formulated as an <em>S</em>-enantiomer. Together, these two characteristics result in clinically equivalent potency for neural blockade, but with a less cardiotoxic profile compared with that for bupivacaine. It has an inherent vasoconstricting effect, which may contribute to its reduced cardiotoxic profile and possibly augment its duration of action (notably, the addition of epinephrine does not further prolong block duration). Although there is some evidence to suggest that ropivacaine may produce a more favorable sensorimotor differential block compared with bupivacaine, the lack of equivalent potency hinders true comparisons. Overall, the clinical profile is similar to that of bupivacaine, taking into account its decreased potency compared with that of bupivacaine.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen189">B. Aminoester Local Anesthetics</h5>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>1. Procaine</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">Procaine was used primarily for infiltration and spinal anesthesia during the first half of the 20th century. Its low potency, relatively slow onset of action (likely due to its high p<em>K</em><sub>a</sub>), and short duration of action limit the widespread use of procaine. Concerns regarding TNS with lidocaine prompted a renewed interest in the use of procaine for intermediate duration subarachnoid anesthesia. Despite its lower incidence of TNS compared with that of lidocaine, the increased risk of block failure and associated nausea have limited its clinical utility.</p>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>2. 2-Chloroprocaine</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">Due to its relative low potency and extremely rapid metabolism by plasma cholinesterases, 2-chloroprocaine may be used in relatively higher concentrations (2%-3%), yet with the lowest potential for systemic toxicity of all the clinically useful local anesthetic agents. Despite its relatively high p<em>K</em><sub>a</sub>, chloroprocaine is administered at relatively higher concentrations, resulting in rapid onset of anesthesia. This characteristic, along with virtually no transmission to the fetus, makes it particularly useful when a rapid onset of surgical epidural anesthesia (ie, urgent or emergent cesarean delivery) is required. The preservative-free solution of 2-chloroprocaine has gained increased popularity for ambulatory subarachnoid anesthesia, where a rapid onset of action along with a predictably short duration of action is desired. Furthermore, the use of 2-chloroprocaine has been associated with very low incidence of TNS. Isobaric 1% 2-chloroprocaine received FDA approval for spinal anesthesia in 2019.</p>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>3. Tetracaine</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">Tetracaine is a potent aminoester local anesthetic, characterized by a slow onset and long duration of action. In contrast to bupivacaine, the duration of action of tetracaine is significantly prolonged with the addition of a vasoconstrictor. Due to its slow onset of action and lack of sensorimotor dissociation (resulting in significant motor blockade), it is rarely indicated for epidural anesthesia or peripheral nerve block, and its primary clinical application is for extended duration subarachnoid anesthesia.</p>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>4. Cocaine</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">Cocaine is the only naturally occurring local anesthetic agent. Current clinical applications for cocaine are largely restricted to topical anesthesia for<a id="page258"></a> ear, nose, and throat procedures, where its intense vasoconstriction is clinically useful to reduce bleeding when instrumenting the nasopharynx. Cocaine inhibits the neuronal reuptake of norepinephrine, mediating its neurogenic vasoconstrictive effects. But it can also result in significant cardiovascular side effects, such as hypertension, tachycardia, and dysrhythmias. Concerns regarding its potential for cardiovascular toxicity, along with its potential for diversion and abuse, have markedly limited its clinical use.</p>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>5. Eutectic Mixture of Local Anesthetics</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">A eutectic mixture of lidocaine and prilocaine, each at a 2.5% concentration, is formulated as viscous liquid (eutectic mixture of local anesthetics [EMLA] cream). This mixture has a lower melting point than either individual local anesthetic, allowing it to exist as oil at room temperature, facilitating its penetration and absorption through dermis. EMLA cream is primarily used to provide dermal analgesia, and it is particularly useful in decreasing the pain associated with venipuncture or placement of a peripheral intravascular catheter. EMLA cream should only be applied to intact skin surfaces as application to breached skin may lead to unpredictably rapid systemic absorption.</p>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>6. Controlled Release Local Anesthetics</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">Multiple formulations for controlled release of local anesthetics have been developed in an attempt to extend the duration of neuronal blockade, and specifically postoperative analgesia. Liposomal bupivacaine, the only delivery system to have received FDA approval, controls the release of bupivacaine by encapsulating molecules in liposomes. These liposomes are multivesicular, spherical structures composed of lipidlike particles arranged in bilayers. As liposomes degrade, bupivacaine is slowly released, with plasma levels persisting for up to 96 hours. Pain control may last for up to 24 hours. Due to concerns for uncontrolled lysis of liposomes causing rapid release of bupivacaine, other local anesthetics should not be administered with liposomal bupivacaine and be avoided for 96 hours after use. Other delivery systems, including bupivacaine encapsulated in a biodegradable sucrose acetate isobutyrate biolayer, a bioerodible polymer consisting of bupivacaine and low-dose meloxicam (HTX-011), and a bupivacaine-collagen bioresorbable implant, are in development and undergoing phase III clinical trials.</p>
<p class="BIBLIOGRAPHYpTitle">References</p>
<ol class="ref">
<li id="bib1">Scholz A. Mechanisms of (local) anaesthetics on voltage-gated sodium and other ion channels. <em>Br J Anaesth</em>. 2002;89:52-61. PMID: 12173241.</li>
<li id="bib2">Lambert DH. Clinical value of adding sodium bicarbonate to local anesthetics. <em>Reg Anesth Pain Med</em>. 2002;27:328-329. PMID: 12016613.</li>
<li id="bib3">Neal JM. Effects of epinephrine in local anesthetics on the central and peripheral nervous system. <em>Reg Anesth Pain Med</em>. 2003;28:124-134. PMID: 12677623.</li>
<li id="bib4">Pehora C, Pearson AME, Kaushal A, Crawford MW, Johnston B. Dexamethasone as an adjuvant to peripheral nerve block. <em>Cochrane Database Syst Rev</em>. 2017;11:CD011770. PMID: 29121400.</li>
<li id="bib5">Brummett CM, Williams BA. Additives to local anesthetics for peripheral nerve block. <em>Int Anesthesiol Clin</em>. 2011;49:104-116. PMID: 21956081.</li>
<li id="bib6"><a id="page259"></a>Vorobeichik L, Brull R, Abdallah FW. Evidence basis for using perineural dexmedetomidine to enhance the quality of brachial plexus nerve blocks: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. <em>Br J Anaesth</em>. 2017;118:167-181. PMID: 28100520.</li>
<li id="bib7">Rosenberg PH, Veering BT, Urmey WF. Maximum recommended doses of local anesthetics: a multifactorial concept. <em>Reg Anesth Pain Med</em>. 2004;29:564-575. PMID: 15635516.</li>
<li id="bib8">Di Gregorio G, Neal JM, Rosenquist RW, et al. Clinical presentation of local anesthetic systemic toxicity: a review of published cases, 1979 to 2009. <em>Reg Anesth Pain Med</em>. 2010;35:181-187. PMID: 20301824.</li>
<li id="bib9">Clarkson CW, Hondeghem LM. Mechanisms for bupivacaine depression of cardiac conduction: fast block of sodium channels during the action potential with slow recovery from block during diastole. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 1985;62:396-405. PMID: 2580463.</li>
<li id="bib10">Weinberg GL. Treatment of local anesthetic systemic toxicity. <em>Reg Anesth Pain Med</em>. 2010;35:188-193. PMID: 20216036.</li>
<li id="bib11">Weinberg GL. Lipid emulsion infusion: resuscitation for local anesthetic and other drugs. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2012;117:180-187. PMID: 22627464.</li>
<li id="bib12">Neal JM. The Third American Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine Practice Advisory on local anesthetic systemic toxicity: executive summary 2017. <em>Reg Anesth Pain Med</em>. 2018;43:113-123.PMID: 29356773.</li>
<li id="bib13">Pollock JE. Neurotoxicity of intrathecal local anaesthetics and transient neurological symptoms. <em>Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol</em>. 2003;17:471-484. PMID: 14529015.</li>
<li id="bib14">Hussain N, McCartney CJL, Neal JM, et al. Local anaesthetic-induced myotoxicity in regional anaesthesia: a systematic review and empirical analysis. <em>Br J Anaesth</em>. 2018;121:822-841. PMID: 30236244.<a id="page260"></a></li>
</ol>
<a id="page261"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp12_1" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_caf/12_Local_Anesthetic_Toxicity/story.html'">Infographic 12.1 Local Anesthetic Toxicity At a Glance <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<a id="page262"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp12_2" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/12_Local_Anesthetics/index.html'">Interactive Video Lecture 12. Local Anesthetics <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>