<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec102">V. Guillain-Barre Syndrome (Polyradiculoneuritis)</h4>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><em>Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS)</em></strong> is an autoimmune disorder characterized by the acute or subacute onset of ascending skeletal muscle weakness or paralysis of the legs occurring in the context of a viral or bacterial infection. This inflammatory, multifocal demyelinating disease usually produces varying degrees of autonomic dysfunction. Respiratory muscle weakness is common during severe cases of GBS. Treatment is primarily supportive.<sup><a href="ch017-sec10.xhtml#bib4">4</a></sup></p>
<a id="page367"></a>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen249">A. Management of Anesthesia</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Multifocal demyelination and muscle disuse atrophy in GBS prohibit the use of succinylcholine due to the risk of life-threatening hyperkalemia. Expected muscle relaxation from nondepolarizing agents may be highly variable and unpredictable and should be avoided. Autonomic nervous system lability is common, which can result in hyperdynamic and hypodynamic responses to stimuli or transient preload changes, respectively; therefore, hemodynamic support should be judicious.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">In addition to respiratory muscle weakness, GBS is accompanied by autonomic nervous system lability, which can result in hyperdynamic and hypodynamic responses.</p>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>