<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec108">I. Integrated Physiology</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Hormones play an essential role in maintaining homeostasis.<sup><a href="ch018-sec07.xhtml#bib1">1</a>-<a href="ch018-sec07.xhtml#bib3">3</a></sup> Hormones are divided chemically into either steroids or nonsteroids. Steroid hormones are lipophilic and able to cross the cell membrane to act directly on cytoplasmic pathways (<strong><a href="ch018-sec02.xhtml#ff18-1">Figure 18.1</a></strong>). They are transported in the plasma bound to specific globulins, albumin, and other plasma proteins and have longer half-lives (hours to even days) compared to nonsteroid hormones.</p>
<p class="indent">Nonsteroid hormones include catecholamines, peptides, proteins, or glycoproteins. They are hydrophilic and thus unable to cross the cell membrane and require specific cell membrane receptors to exert their effect. These hormones are typically not bound to plasma proteins, have rapid onsets of action (minutes), shorter half-lives (minutes), and faster metabolism. Some hormones are secreted continuously, whereas others are secreted in a pulsatile manner (cortisol).</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Excessive secretion of growth hormone (GH), usually from a pituitary adenoma, results in acromegaly or gigantism. Acromegaly occurs if excess GH is produced <strong><em>after</em></strong> epiphyseal closure. Gigantism occurs if excess GH is produced <strong><em>before</em></strong> epiphyseal closure (<strong><a href="ch018-sec02.xhtml#tt18-1">Table 18.1</a></strong>).</p>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>