<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec94">III. Perioperative Laboratory Testing</h4>
<p class="nonindent">There is no benefit to &#x201C;routine&#x201D; preanesthetic laboratory testing in patients presenting for elective surgery. Furthermore, this approach is extremely inefficient. Routine preoperative testing has been estimated to cost $3 billion per year.<sup><a href="ch016-sec06.xhtml#bib30">30</a>,<a href="ch016-sec06.xhtml#bib31">31</a></sup> Owing to the intrinsic characteristic of screening tests, especially when a panel of tests is ordered, there is a high likelihood that one result will return as abnormal. However, in a person with no risk factors, this result is more likely to be a false positive than a true positive. The ASA&#x2019;s &#x201C;Practice Advisory for Preanesthetic Evaluation&#x201D; (2012) and the American Board of Internal Medicine&#x2019;s &#x201C;Choosing Wisely Campaign&#x201D; support this view.<sup><a href="ch016-sec06.xhtml#bib32">32</a>,<a href="ch016-sec06.xhtml#bib33">33</a></sup> Nevertheless, selective preanesthetic laboratory testing is appropriate for some patients, based on their medical conditions, symptomatology elicited on interview, and the nature of the planned surgery.<sup><a href="ch016-sec06.xhtml#bib34">34</a>,<a href="ch016-sec06.xhtml#bib35">35</a></sup> <strong><a href="#tt16-14">Table 16.14</a></strong> summarizes the general principles of preoperative laboratory testing in patients undergoing elective noncardiac surgery.</p>
<a id="page353"></a>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt16-14"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;16.14</span> General Principles on Preoperative Testing in Adults Undergoing Elective Noncardiac Surgery</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:35%;"></col>
<col style="width:65%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Factor</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Comment</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">ASA physical status</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">ASA PS 1 or 2 patients generally do not require preoperative testing before low-risk surgeries.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Very-low-risk procedures (eg, colonoscopy, cataract surgery) in patients with &#x2265;METs</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">No testing is generally needed except point-of-care urine pregnancy and blood glucose if the patient is diabetic.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Pregnancy testing</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Should be conducted on females of reproductive age unless the patient has had hysterectomy or is confirmed to be postmenopausal.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Point-of-care blood glucose</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">In diabetic patients.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Cardiac workup</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">According to ACC/AHA guidelines.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Pulmonary function testing</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">It is performed for risk stratification prior to lung resection and some cardiac surgeries. Consider in patients with unexplained dyspnea.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Chest x-ray</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Consider in patients with significant cardiopulmonary disease, new-onset symptoms plausibly referable to cardiopulmonary disease, or as a baseline in patients undergoing major upper abdominal or thoracic surgery. No need to repeat if one has been completed within 12&#x00A0;mo, results were within normal limits, and there has been no change in clinical status.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Polysomnography</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Consider in patients at very high risk of sleep apnea being considered for high-risk procedures.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Intermediate- to high-risk procedures</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Serum chemistries, complete blood count, and coagulation profile should be obtained based on the patient&#x2019;s comorbidities. No need to repeat within 6&#x00A0;mo if results were within normal limits, there has been no change in clinical status, and the patient is not on medication likely to significantly change laboratory tests (eg, anticoagulant, diuretic).</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">ACC/AHA, American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association; ASA, American Society of Anesthesiologists; ECG, electrocardiogram; METs, metabolic equivalents; PS, physical status.</p>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>