<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec135">II. Practical Approach to Acid-Base Interpretation</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Arterial blood gas (ABG) analysis is primarily used to assess adequacy of gas exchange and oxygen delivery. It is the most frequently ordered test in anesthetized and critically ill patients to guide ventilation and treatment, and it provides data including pH, arterial partial pressure of oxygen (Pa<span class="usmall">O</span><sub>2</sub>), Pa<span class="usmall">CO</span><sub>2</sub>, and HCO<sub>3</sub><sup>&#x2212;</sup>. Analysis of these values can be used to determine whether an acid-base disturbance exists, what the disturbance is, and its possible etiologies. Thus, the understanding and ability to quickly analyze ABG data are crucial for every anesthesiologist.</p>
<p class="indent">A simple acid-base disorder, typically one of the metabolic or respiratory disturbances occurring in isolation, is the most common clinical presentation. However, critically ill patients can have multiple acid-base disorders. Physiologic compensation is never complete; thus the pH will never be completely normal in a simple acid-base disorder. However, in the presence of multiple acid-base disturbances, the pH can normalize or reach life-threatening extremes.</p>
<p class="indent">ABG analysis is best approached systematically to ensure rapid and precise interpretation. One common, stepwise method is based on the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation; it analyzes the pH, Pa<span class="usmall">CO</span><sub>2</sub>, HCO<sub>3</sub><sup>&#x2212;</sup>, AG, and presence of compensation (<strong><a href="#tt23-6">Table 23.6</a></strong>).</p>
<a id="page485"></a>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt23-6"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;23.6</span> Stepwise Approach to Arterial Blood Gas Analysis</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Step 1: Examine the pH to determine whether academia or alkalemia is present:</strong></p>
<p class="tbodyleft">If the pH is &#x003C;7.35, a primary acidemia present</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">If the pH is &#x003E;7.45, a primary alkalemia is present</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Step 2: Examine the Pa<span class="usmall">CO</span><sub>2</sub> to determine if the primary disturbance is respiratory or metabolic:</strong></p>
<p class="tbodyleft">If acidemia is present: Pa<span class="usmall">CO</span><sub>2</sub> &#x003E;40&#x00A0;mm Hg&#x00A0;=&#x00A0;respiratory acidosis; Pa<span class="usmall">CO</span><sub>2</sub> &#x003C;40&#x00A0;mm Hg&#x00A0;=&#x00A0;metabolic acidosis (proceed to Step 3)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">If alkalemia is present: Pa<span class="usmall">CO</span><sub>2</sub> &#x003E;40&#x00A0;mm Hg&#x00A0;=&#x00A0;metabolic alkalosis; Pa<span class="usmall">CO</span><sub>2</sub> &#x003C;40&#x00A0;mm Hg&#x00A0;=&#x00A0;respiratory alkalosis (proceed to Step 4)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Step 3 (acidemia only): Calculate the anion gap (AG):</strong></p>
<p class="tbodyleft">AG&#x00A0;=&#x00A0;Na<sup>+</sup>&#x00A0;&#x2212;&#x00A0;(Cl<sup>&#x2212;</sup>&#x00A0;+&#x00A0;HCO<sub>3</sub><sup>&#x2212;</sup>); if AG &#x003E;11, then a &#x201C;high anion gap metabolic acidosis&#x201D; is present (see <strong><a href="ch023-sec01.xhtml#tt23-1">Table 23.1</a></strong>)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Step 4: Determine if appropriate compensation is present to assess whether the disturbance is acute or chronic:</strong></p>
<p class="tbodyleft">See <strong><a href="ch023-sec01.xhtml#tt23-5">Table 23.5</a></strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Step 5: Determine likely etiologies of the acid-base disturbance:</strong></p>
<p class="tbodyleft">See <strong><a href="ch023-sec01.xhtml#tt23-1">Tables 23.1</a>-<a href="ch023-sec01.xhtml#tt23-4">23.4</a></strong></p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">Cl, chlorine; HCO<sub>3</sub><sup>&#x2212;</sup>, hydrogen carbonate; Na, sodium; Pa<span class="usmall">CO</span><sub>2</sub>, arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">A typical perioperative clinical scenario illustrating the application of this stepwise method is shown in the <em>Clinical Scenario</em> that follows.</p>
<p class="BX3MH"><strong>Clinical Scenario: Arterial Blood Gas Interpretation</strong></p>
<div class="casebox">
<p class="nonindent">A 52-year-old, morbidly obese woman with diabetes presents to the operating room for emergent debridement of a necrotizing soft tissue infection of her left foot, with the following preoperative ABG (room air):</p>
<p class="BX3MUL1">ABG: pH 7.10, Paco<sub>2</sub> 28&#x00A0;mm Hg, Pao<sub>2</sub> 88&#x00A0;mm Hg, HCO<sub>3</sub><sup>&#x2212;</sup> 11 mEq/L, Na<sup>+</sup> 136 mEq/L, K<strong><sup>+</sup></strong> 5.5 mEq/L, Cl<sup>&#x2212;</sup> 99 mEq/L, lactate 14&#x00A0;mmol/L</p>
<p class="BX3MUL1">Step 1: because the pH is &#x003C;7.35, acidemia is present.</p>
<p class="BX3MUL1">Step 2: because the Paco<sub>2</sub> is &#x003C;40, a primary metabolic acidosis is present.</p>
<p class="BX3MUL1">Step 3: because the anion gap is [136&#x00A0;&#x2212;&#x00A0;(99&#x00A0;+&#x00A0;11)] 26, a &#x201C;high anion gap&#x201D; metabolic acidosis is present.</p>
<p class="BX3MUL1">Step 4: because the Paco<sub>2</sub> is appropriately decreased (HCO<sub>3</sub><sup>&#x2212;</sup> is 13 mEq/L below the normal of 24 mEq/L; 13&#x00A0;&#x00D7;&#x00A0;1.2&#x00A0;mm Hg&#x00A0;=&#x00A0;15.6&#x00A0;mm Hg; 28&#x00A0;+&#x00A0;15.6&#x00A0;=&#x00A0;43.6&#x00A0;mm Hg), a compensated metabolic acidosis is present.</p>
<p class="BX3MUL1">Step 5: The patient has a severe soft tissue infection and systemic sepsis, with impaired tissue oxygen use resulting in anaerobic metabolism and accumulation of lactic acid, leading to a compensated, high anion gap, metabolic acidosis.</p>
</div>
<p class="video"><video data-id="YwF9IhjD" controls="controls" class="jwp-video" crossorigin="anonymous" style="width:100%; height:auto; width:320px; height:240px;">Browser issues</video></p>
<p class="video1" id="vid23-1"><strong>VIDEO 23.1</strong></p>
<p class="video2"><strong>Fluid Warmers</strong></p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>