<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/jquery.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
<!--<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-1.10.2.min.js'></script>-->
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-migrate-1.2.1.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery.qtip.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/etext.js'></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec168">VIII. Summary</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Laparoscopic and robot-assisted procedures have several advantages over the traditional, open approach, including early mobilization, shorter length of hospital stay, and quicker recovery. The hemodynamic and respiratory consequences of the pneumoperitoneum required for these procedures are generally well tolerated except in patients with severe cardiac or pulmonary disease. General anesthesia is required for the majority of these procedures to ensure <a id="page578"></a>adequate ventilation and prevent the pain from peritoneal distension. The majority of complications due to laparoscopy result from insufflation pressures higher than 15&#x00A0;mm Hg or improper placement of trocars. The former complications can be managed most often by decreasing the intra-abdominal pressure, while the latter may require open laparotomy if the trocar has injured a vital organ or major vessel. However, on the whole, laparoscopic techniques have been proven safe and highly effective in reducing surgical morbidity and speeding recovery.</p>
<p class="BIBLIOGRAPHYpTitle">Acknowledgment</p>
<p class="nonindent">The authors gratefully acknowledge the First Edition contributions of Dr Adriana Dana Oprea as portions of the chapter were retained in this update.</p>
<p class="BIBLIOGRAPHYpTitle">References</p>
<ol class="ref"><li id="bib1">Liu JJ, Maxwell BG, Panousis P, et al. Perioperative outcomes for laparoscopic and robotic compared with open prostatectomy using the National Surgical Quality Improvement Program (NSQIP) database. <em>Urology</em>. 2013;82(3):579-583.</li>
<li id="bib2">Lestar M, Gunnarsson L, Lagerstrand L, Wiklund P, Odeberg-Wernerman S. Hemodynamic perturbations during robot-assisted laparoscopic radical prostatectomy in 45&#x00B0; Trendelenburg position. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2011;113(5):1069-1075.</li>
<li id="bib3">Kadam P, Marda M, Shah VR. Carbon dioxide absorption during laparoscopic donor nephrectomy: a comparison between retroperitoneal and transperitoneal approaches. <em>Transplant Proc</em>. 2008;40(4):1119-1121. doi:10.1016/j.transproceed.2008.03.024</li>
<li id="bib4">Ng CS, Gill IS, Sung GT, Whalley DG, Graham R, Schweizer D. Retroperitoneoscopic surgery is not associated with increased carbon dioxide absorption. <em>J Urol</em>. 1999;162(4):1268-1272.</li>
<li id="bib5">Hsu RL, Kaye AD, Urman RD. Anesthetic challenges in robotic-assisted urologic surgery. <em>Rev Urol</em>. 2013;15(4):178-184.</li>
<li id="bib6">Grabowski JE, Talamini MA. Physiological effects of pneumoperitoneum. <em>J Gastrointest Surg</em>. 2009;13(5):1009-1016.</li>
<li id="bib7">Afaneh C, Abelson J, Rich BS, et al. Obesity does not increase morbidity of laparoscopic cholecystectomy. <em>J Surg Res</em>. 2014;19(2):491-497.</li>
<li id="bib8">Sun N, Zhang J, Zhang C, Shi Y. Single-site robotic cholecystectomy versus multi-port laparoscopic cholecystectomy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. <em>Am J Surg</em>. 2018;216(6):1205-1211. doi:10.1016/j.amjsurg.2018.04.018</li>
<li id="bib9">Vaughan J, Nagendran M, Cooper J, et al. Anaesthetic regimens for day-procedure laparoscopic cholecystectomy. <em>Cochrane Database Syst Rev</em>. 2014;1:CD009784.</li>
<li id="bib10">Kamali A, Ashrafi TH, et al. A comparative study on the prophylactic effects of paracetamol and dexmedetomidine for controlling hemodynamics during surgery and postoperative pain in patients with laparoscopic cholecystectomy. <em>Medicine (Baltimore)</em>. 2018;97(51):e13330. doi:10.1097/MD.0000000000013330</li>
<li id="bib11">Collard V, Mistraletti G, Taqi A, et al. Intraoperative esmolol infusion in the absence of opioids spares postoperative fentanyl in patients undergoing ambulatory laparoscopic cholecystectomy. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2007;105(5):1255-1262.</li>
<li id="bib12">Donatsky AM, Bjerrum F, Gogenur I. Surgical techniques to minimize shoulder pain after laparoscopic cholecystectomy. A systematic review. <em>Surg Endosc</em>. 2013;27(7):2275-2282.</li>
<li id="bib13">Vaughan J, Gurusamy KS, Davidson BR. Day-surgery versus overnight stay surgery for laparoscopic cholecystectomy. <em>Cochrane Database Syst Rev</em>. 2013;7:CD006798.</li></ol>
<a id="page579"></a><a id="page580"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp27_1" onclick="openLinkInNewTab('https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_caf/27_Laparoscopic_Procedures/story.html');">Infographic 27.1 Complications of Laparoscopy At a Glance  <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<a id="page581"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp27_2" onclick="openLinkInNewTab('https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/27_Anesthesia_for_Laparoscopic_Robotic_Surgeries/index.html');">Interactive Video Lecture 27. Anesthesia for Laparoscopic and Robotic Surgeries <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>