<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec144">IV. Transfusion Reactions</h4>
<p class="nonindent">With over 16 million blood components transfused annually, the risks of transfusion are relatively rare, with an overall incidence of 282 reactions reported per 100,000 units transfused.<sup><a href="ch024-sec07.xhtml#bib1">1</a></sup> More than half of these reactions are mild, febrile nonhemolytic reactions or mild to moderate allergic reactions, and the incidence of life-threatening transfusion reactions declined significantly over the past few years from 9.4 per 100,000 units transfused in 2015 to 4.7 severe transfusion reactions per 100,000 units transfused throughout the United States in 2017.<sup><a href="ch024-sec07.xhtml#bib13">13</a></sup> Transfusion reactions are often organized by pathophysiology into immune-mediated or nonimmune-mediated reactions. The latter include transmission of infection (eg, hepatitis C) or metabolic derangements associated with massive transfusion (eg, hypocalcemia). <strong><a href="#tt24-3">Table 24.3</a></strong> summarizes many of the reported noninfectious adverse effects of transfusion, and the following sections will focus on some of the most clinically significant reactions.</p>
<p class="indent"><strong><em>Hemolytic transfusion reactions</em></strong> result from intravascular or extravascular hemolysis of endogenous and transfused RBCs, typically when the recipient expresses antibodies to blood-borne antigens within the donor product. This reaction is acute and severe when transfusion involves the naturally occurring IgM anti-A and anti-B antibodies to the ABO blood cell antigens. Acute hemolytic transfusion reactions (AHTRs) are rare (1:40,000) and almost always result from clerical errors with blood sampling, typing, crossmatch, or erroneous administration of an inappropriate blood product to the wrong patient. Rarely, transfusion of incompatible plasma can also result in acute hemolysis reported less than once every 50,000 transfusions (<strong><a href="ch024-sec01.xhtml#tt24-2">Table 24.2</a></strong>).<sup><a href="ch024-sec07.xhtml#bib8">8</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Vigilance for the diagnosis of AHTR must remain high because many of the signs and symptoms can be masked during general anesthesia. Responsive patients may complain of chest pain, or abdominal discomfort. Vital signs become unstable, with hemolysis and diffuse bradykinin and histamine release leading to hemoglobinuria, fever, hypotension, tachycardia, and bronchospasm. AHTRs are best treated with supportive care after discontinuing all blood-product transfusions and initiating investigation into the etiology of the incompatibility. The mortality from AHTR remains high with approximately 2% to 7% of mistransfusions being fatal as patients may progress to multiorgan system failure from systemic shock, DIC, acute renal failure, and obstructive hepatic dysfunction.<sup><a href="ch024-sec07.xhtml#bib8">8</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent"><strong><em>Delayed hemolytic transfusion reactions (DHTR)</em></strong> often occur days after blood-product administration and are typically less severe, presenting with progressive anemia, jaundice, and hemoglobinuria in the absence of<a id="page511"></a><a id="page512"></a> hemodynamic instability. DHTR results from a humoral reaction to antigens in transfused blood products in recipients with a history of alloimmunization to antigens such as Rh, Kell, Kidd, Duffy, among others. <strong><em>Alloimmunization</em></strong> occurs with pregnancy or exposure to blood-product transfusion as the recipient develops antibodies to blood-borne antigens at a rate of about 1 per 1500 to 3000 RBC transfused. This puts these patients at risk for future hemolytic transfusion reactions and emphasizes the importance of antibody screening and complete crossmatch prior to nonemergency transfusion.<sup><a href="ch024-sec07.xhtml#bib8">8</a></sup></p>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt24-3"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;24.3</span> Transfusion Reactions</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:33%;"></col>
<col style="width:33%;"></col>
<col style="width:34%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Adverse Reaction</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>US Reactions per 100,000 Components transfused</strong><sup>a</sup></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Notes</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Overall</strong></p>
<p class="tbodyleft">All life-threatening</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">281.8</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">4.7</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">No change in overall number, but life-threatening reactions down from 9.4/100,000 in 2015 survey</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3" colspan="3"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Immune-Mediated Reactions</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Febrile nonhemolytic reaction</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">120.5</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">&#x00A0;</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Mild-moderate allergic reactions</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">88.4</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">&#x00A0;</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Anaphylaxis, severe allergic reaction</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">2.5</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">IgA deficiency increases risk; washing PRBCs may avoid reaction</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Delayed hemolytic transfusion reaction</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">4.8</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Alloantibodies to minor RBC antigens</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Acute hemolytic transfusion reaction</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">1.1</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">ABO incompatibility (0.21/100,000) other antibodies (0.84/100,000)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Posttransfusion purpura</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">3.7</p></td>
<td class="td3">&#x00A0;</td></tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Transfusion-related acute lung injury</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">1.5</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Reduced risk with male-predominant donors</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Transfusion-associated graft-versus-host</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Zero reported in 2017 (0.0058 in 2015)</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Avoided with blood irradiation for at-risk patients</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2" colspan="3"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Nonimmune Mediated</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Transfusion-associated circulatory overload</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">11.7</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Higher risk in critically ill patients</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Metabolic derangements</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">&#x00A0;</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Hyperkalemia, hypocalcemia, hypothermia, iron overload</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3" colspan="3"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Transfusion-Transmitted Infections</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Viral infections</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">0.039</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Estimated: HIV 1:1.5 million units</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">HCV 1:1.2 million units</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">HBV 1:1 million units</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Bacterial infections</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">0.23</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Negligible with PRT</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Parasitic infections (babesia, Chagas)</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">0.068</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Negligible with PRT</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">HBV, hepatitis B virus; HCV, hepatitis C virus; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; IgA, immunoglobulin-A; NBCUS, National Blood Collection and Utilization Survey; PRBCs, packed red blood cells; PRT, pathogen-reduction technology.<sup><a href="ch024-sec07.xhtml#bib8">8</a>,<a href="ch024-sec07.xhtml#bib13">13</a></sup></p>
<p class="u_tfoot"><sup>a</sup>Numbers reported in the 2017 National Blood Collection and Utilization Survey and from the American Red Cross guidelines.<sup><a href="ch024-sec07.xhtml#bib8">8</a>,<a href="ch024-sec07.xhtml#bib13">13</a></sup></p>
</div>
<p class="indent"><strong><em>Posttransfusion purpura (PTP)</em></strong> is a rare complication; but PTP carries high risk and mortality as it results in significant thrombocytopenia 7 to 10&#x00A0;days post transfusion. Patients with a history of alloimmunization secondary to pregnancy or previous transfusions are at highest risk of PTP. Treatment includes high-dose intravenous immune globulin (IVIG) and supportive care.<sup><a href="ch024-sec07.xhtml#bib8">8</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent"><strong><em>Transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI)</em></strong> remains one of the leading causes of transfusion-associated morbidity and mortality. Consensus diagnostic criteria require acute (within 6 hours of transfusion), noncardiogenic pulmonary edema with bilateral infiltrates and a ratio of arterial partial pressure of oxygen to the inspired concentration of oxygen of &#x003C;300 (eg, 200/0.75). Blood products with high plasma content are generally implicated in the majority of the cases of TRALI, which can be explained by two suggested pathophysiologic mechanisms.</p>
<p class="indent">The most likely cause involves antineutrophil (anti-HNA) or anti-HLA antibodies formulated in multiparous female donors during a past pregnancy or as a result of sensitization from previous transfusions or transplantation. In fact, the practice of using male-predominant plasma donors significantly decreases the incidence of TRALI. The second commonly discussed &#x201C;two hit hypothesis&#x201D; for TRALI implicates the role of pro-inflammatory biologic response modifiers released in stored blood products that activate primed neutrophils in the recipient. Both pathophysiologic mechanisms result in breakdown of the capillary alveolar membrane, interstitial pulmonary edema, and microscopic alveolar hemorrhage, all of which lead to acute lung injury. The treatment for TRALI focuses on supportive care and lung protective low tidal volume mechanical ventilation as the low-pressure pulmonary edema does not generally respond to diuretic therapy.<sup><a href="ch024-sec07.xhtml#bib8">8</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent"><strong><em>Transfusion-associated circulatory overload (TACO)</em></strong> is one of the most frequent serious complications of blood therapy with an incidence of about 1:50 component transfusions. It results from high-pressure cardiogenic pulmonary edema frequently associated with large volume or rapid transfusion. It is not an immune-mediated response and occurs more frequently in critically ill patients or those with a history of cardiopulmonary or renal disease. These patients develop hypoxemia secondary to ventilation perfusion mismatch and intrapulmonary shunt. Furthermore, patients express an elevated level of brain natriuretic peptide in response to ventricular distension. Typically, TACO responds to diuretic treatment and pulmonary alveolar recruitment.<sup><a href="ch024-sec07.xhtml#bib8">8</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent"><strong><em>Transfusion-transmitted infections</em></strong> have been a focus of transfusion medicine research for several decades, which has resulted in a significant decrease in the rate of infection for recipients of allogeneic transfusion. The overall rate of transfusion-transmitted infections was significantly lower in the 2017 NBCUS than the number reported in 2015.<sup><a href="ch024-sec07.xhtml#bib13">13</a></sup> The greatest fear among blood transfusion recipients usually concerns viral infections such as hepatitis C and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). However, these are actually a rare result of blood-product transfusion because of the increased sensitivity<a id="page513"></a> of donor screening tests now available and a short window of time between donor infection and seroconversion. Transfusion transmission of hepatitis B has also declined because of widespread vaccination. Over the past few years, many blood centers have introduced pathogen-reduction technology to reduce the risk of bacterial contamination especially with apheresis platelet components. Accordingly, the incidence of posttransfusion sepsis, or transfusion-transmitted bacterial infections, is quite rare. <strong><a href="#tt24-3">Table 24.3</a></strong> summarizes the residual risk of transfusion-transmitted infections.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Only in unusual circumstances is it appropriate to transfuse an anemic patient prior to elective surgery. The cause for anemia should be found and the patient treated. Alternatives to transfusion, such as perioperative cell salvage, should be considered.</p>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>