<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec172">I. General Considerations</h4>
<p class="nonindent">The anesthetic management of otolaryngologic (ORL) surgery is complex. Many variables must be considered, including understanding the surgical indications and procedure(s). Depending on the operation, the anesthesiologist may jointly manage the airway with the surgeon. Additionally, airway anatomy may be distorted by tumor, infection, trauma, congenital abnormalities, radiation exposure, or prior surgery. Age-specific differences in anatomy and physiology, along with existing comorbidities, must also be considered.</p>
<p class="indent">Assessing the airway extends beyond the physical examination. Familiarity with airway imaging, particularly computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), is critical. A review of digital videos of airway fiberoptic examinations should be performed if they are available. If not, the anesthesiologist may consider performing fiberoptic examination of the airway under topical anesthesia prior to induction.</p>
<p class="indent">The selection and dosage of anesthetics and adjuvant medications should be tailored to the procedure being performed. Patients undergoing ORL procedures must also be carefully monitored for blood loss, which can be underestimated due to spillage onto the surgical field, swallowing, and distance of the surgical field from the anesthesiologist. Ingestion of blood can contribute to postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) and should be aspirated via orogastric tube prior to emergence and extubation.</p>
<p class="indent">Topical alpha agonists for vasoconstriction (eg, phenylephrine) can cause hypertension and increased blood flow to the pulmonary circulation. This can be associated with pulmonary edema and death, especially if the alpha agonistic effect is combined with pharmacologic beta blockade. Given the short duration of action of topical vasoconstrictors, one can allow moderate hypertension to self-resolve or it can be treated by increasing the dose of vasodilatory anesthetics. Direct vasodilators are the proper treatment for a severe hypertensive response to topical vasoconstrictors.<sup><a href="ch029-sec14.xhtml#bib1">1</a></sup> Closed-loop communication with the ORL team is critical in anticipating and responding to the side effects of mucosal vasoconstrictors.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>