<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec124">II. Avoiding Complications</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Complications from peripheral nerve blocks include local anesthetic toxicity, nerve injury, bleeding, infection, and damage to adjacent structures. <strong><em>Local anesthetic toxicity</em></strong> is discussed in <a href="ch012.xhtml">Chapter 12</a>. Techniques to reduce the risk of local anesthetic systemic toxicity include reducing the dose to the lowest effective dose, intermittent aspiration during injection, adding an intravascular marker (epinephrine) to the local anesthetic, and maintaining communication with the patient to assess for central nervous system symptoms (eg, perioral numbness, tinnitus).</p>
<p class="indent">Avoidance of <strong><em>nerve injury</em></strong> can theoretically be reduced with ultrasound imaging, yet ultrasound has not been conclusively shown to reduce such complications. Mechanisms include mechanical injury, chemical toxicity, ischemia, or compression. Injuries can range in severity, but most resolve with time.</p>
<p class="indent">Adherence to the American Society of Regional Anesthesia&#x2019;s guidelines on peripheral nerve blocks should minimize risk of <strong><em>bleeding</em></strong>, especially for patients on antiplatelet or anticoagulant medications.<sup><a href="ch021-sec05.xhtml#bib2">2</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Infectious complications are rare but can be minimized with sterile technique, especially during placement of an indwelling catheter. Damage to adjacent structures can be minimized through identification of such structures (eg, pleura, blood vessels).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>