<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec177">II. Ocular Physiology</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen457">A. Formation and Drainage of Aqueous Humor</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Aqueous humor production and drainage are a vital aspect of maintaining normal intraocular pressure (IOP) and vision. Aqueous humor is produced continuously by the ciliary body and secreted behind the iris through the pupil. Stimulation of beta-2 receptors increases the production of aqueous humor; stimulation of alpha-2 receptors decreases such production. Secretion of chloride by the ciliary epithelium leads to an osmotic influx of fluid, a secondary mechanism mediated by carbonic anhydrase.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Aqueous humor is produced continuously by the ciliary body and secreted behind the iris through the pupil.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">Drainage of aqueous humor occurs primarily through the canal of Schlemm. Aqueous humor can also be reabsorbed via the ciliary muscle. This &#x201C;uveoscleral&#x201D; flow is increased by ciliary muscle relaxation and is typically mediated by prostaglandins. Therefore, topical prostaglandin analogues can be used to relieve IOP. Topical beta-blockers can also decrease IOP by reducing aqueous humor production.<sup><a href="ch029-sec14.xhtml#bib14">14</a></sup></p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen458">B. Maintenance of IOP</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Volatile anesthetics and sedatives/hypnotics (with the exception of ketamine) reduce IOP. Opioids may also lower IOP. Nondepolarizing paralytics indirectly reduce IOP by attenuating mechanical reflexes that raise IOP, such as coughing.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Volatile anesthetics and sedatives or hypnotics (with the exception of ketamine) reduce IOP.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">Succinylcholine may cause an elevation in IOP, but it is unclear if this effect has clinical significance. As it is the drug of choice for rapid-onset paralysis, the risks of elevated IOP must be weighed against the risk of not obtaining ideal intubation conditions.<sup><a href="ch029-sec14.xhtml#bib9">9</a></sup> Alternatively, rocuronium may be used for rapid-onset paralysis to facilitate tracheal intubation.</p>
<p class="indent">To relieve IOP acutely, raise the head and prevent other causes of venous congestion. Under GA, hypocapnia can be used. Additional tactics include the use of muscle relaxants during intubation, the use of an LMA in lieu of intubation, deep extubation, or local anesthetization of the airway. IV sedatives can also rapidly relieve IOP.</p>
<p class="video"><video data-id="7bDlwoJK" controls="controls" class="jwp-video" crossorigin="anonymous" style="width:100%; height:auto; width:320px; height:240px;">Browser issues</video></p>
<p class="video1" id="vid29-5"><strong>VIDEO 29.5</strong></p>
<p class="video2"><strong>Oculocardiac Reflex</strong></p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen459">C. Oculocardiac Reflex</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Via this reflex, ocular stimulation may trigger hypotension, syncope, bradycardia, and even asystole.</p>
<p class="indent">Treatment begins with cessation of any stimuli and ensuring adequate airway and ventilation. If these measures do not succeed, antimuscarinic agents should be administered intravenously. Atropine (20 &#x03BC;g/kg) or glycopyrrolate (15 &#x03BC;g/kg) are both good agents for treatment or prophylaxis. Deepening of the anesthesia, whether local or general, also blunts the reflex, in some instances, leading to a net increase in mean arterial pressure.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>