<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec182">VII. Anesthetic Management of Specific Situations</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen472">A. Open Eye-Full Stomach</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The management of a patient with a lacerated globe and a full stomach requires awareness of the relative risks of each condition. The most controversial issue is how to quickly secure an airway in a patient at risk for aspiration without <a id="page618"></a>causing a significant increase in IOP, which could extrude eye contents and cause blindness.</p>
<p class="indent">A large dose of an induction agent such as propofol (2&#x00A0;mg/kg) addresses both problems by facilitating conditions for endotracheal intubation while reducing the risk of straining or coughing. Succinylcholine is arguably the most appropriate paralytic for rapid sequence induction in a patient at risk for aspiration; however, it is known to increase IOP 10 to 20&#x00A0;mm Hg, peaking at 2 to 4 minutes and lasting 7 to 10 minutes.<sup><a href="ch029-sec14.xhtml#bib17">17</a></sup> There is also anecdotal evidence of succinylcholine causing extrusion of vitreous humor in an open globe,<sup><a href="ch029-sec14.xhtml#bib18">18</a></sup> but there is no evidence that succinylcholine causes damage to an intact globe that has elevated IOP, such as in glaucoma.</p>
<p class="indent">Alternatively, a high dose of a nondepolarizing agent (eg, rocuronium 2&#x00A0;mg/kg) has been shown to provide paralysis within 60 seconds, 90% of the time. The major drawback is the prolonged paralysis. although the availability of sugammadex addresses the issues of failed airway and unintended neuromuscular block at the end of the procedure.</p>
<p class="indent">If GA is contraindicated, local anesthesia should be considered. With an open-globe, penetrating nerve blocks are contraindicated because the pain of injection and the fluid injected may raise IOP. Topical agents are a safer alternative in such situations.</p>
<p class="indent">Important measures to utilize regardless of the anesthetic type include the following: eliminating any significant increases in IOP, keeping the head elevated, not impairing venous drainage at the neck through the application of cricoid pressure or palpation of the carotid artery, avoiding direct pressure on the globe (eg, face mask), and avoiding painful or intense stimuli of the eye prior to the full onset of the chosen anesthetic.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">With an open globe, penetrating nerve blocks are contraindicated because the pain of injection and the fluid injected may raise IOP.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen473">B. Strabismus Surgery</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Strabismus is a persistent misalignment of the visual fields, typically correctable by surgery to counteract the deviation. The surgical repair provides the most benefit when performed before the age of 5&#x00A0;years, at which time the neural pathways involved in vision have neared maturation.<sup><a href="ch029-sec14.xhtml#bib9">9</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Typically, these repairs are performed under GA due to the immobility required for the work and the pain of the skin and muscle incisions. Endotracheal intubation is preferred to secure the airway due to its proximity to the surgical field and the risk of inadvertent contact.</p>
<p class="indent">Acetaminophen may combat the eye irritation felt postoperatively. Fentanyl IV is also an appropriate adjunct.</p>
<p class="indent">Strabismus repair has one of the highest rates of PONV of any commonly performed operation, with some studies showing up to 80% in patients who receive no prophylaxis.<sup><a href="ch029-sec14.xhtml#bib19">19</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Dexamethasone (0.5&#x00A0;mg/kg IV up to 4&#x00A0;mg), ondansetron (0.15&#x00A0;mg/kg IV up to 4&#x00A0;mg), and full replacement of fluid deficits with crystalloids have been shown to reduce the incidence of PONV. Consider gastric emptying with oro-/nasogastric tube while the patient is still deeply anesthetized, in the absence of any contraindications.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen474">C. Intraocular Surgery</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The majority of intraocular surgery is performed under local anesthesia rather than GA, the latter having a higher morbidity, higher resource consumption, and longer hospital stay. Various nerve blocks are used to provide surgical <a id="page619"></a>analgesia (see previous section) and are also critical for blunting the oculocardiac reflex. Some contraindications to using regional anesthesia for eye surgery include procedures lasting longer than 2 hours, local anesthetic allergy, and the patient&#x2019;s inability to lie supine, be still, or remain awake throughout the surgery. Some surgeons may tolerate a patient who falls into natural sleep, but it carries the risk of sudden movement during REM sleep or upon awakening.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen475">D. Retinal Detachment Surgery</h5>
<p class="nonindent">As with other ophthalmic surgeries, the primary concern is choosing GA versus nerve block. For vitreoretinal surgery, a gas bubble is often placed by the surgeon to provide steady pressure that will aid reattachment of the retina to the pigment epithelium. N<sub>2</sub>O should be avoided during surgery and, depending on the type of gas installed in the eye, for the next 2 to 12&#x00A0;weeks.<sup><a href="ch029-sec14.xhtml#bib20">20</a>,<a href="ch029-sec14.xhtml#bib21">21</a></sup></p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>