<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec153">II. Enhanced Recovery Pathways</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Since the late 1990s, a great deal of investigation has been directed to methods of optimizing surgical outcomes and accelerating recovery through enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) pathways. ERAS pathways consist of bundles of care elements targeted to specific surgical procedures, combining preoperative optimization, intraoperative measures, and postoperative care goals. ERAS pathways have been described and evaluated for patients undergoing major spine and orthopedic surgery, among many other surgical populations.<sup><a href="ch026-sec09.xhtml#bib2">2</a>,<a href="ch026-sec09.xhtml#bib3">3</a></sup> Common aims of such bundles include reducing the risk of major organ dysfunction, improving pain management, improving wound healing, promoting early mobilization to speed surgical recovery, and minimizing risk of venous thromboembolism. All of these objectives support overarching goals of reducing hospital length of stay, morbidity, and mortality.</p>
<p class="indent">The anesthesiologist&#x2019;s role in ERAS pathways begins in the preanesthetic assessment phase, helping to clearly identify which patients are candidates for particular pathways and coordinating preoperative medication optimization, correction of anemia, smoking cessation, improving nutritional status, and conducting appropriate testing.</p>
<p class="indent">On the day of surgery, preoperative consumption of a clear carbohydrate beverage several hours before surgery is shown to decrease insulin resistance. Multimodal analgesic therapy is frequently initiated shortly before surgery, often combining nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, acetaminophen, gabapentinoids, and other adjuncts. Regional anesthetic techniques may also be initiated in this phase.</p>
<p class="indent">Intraoperative priorities focus on optimizing fluid balance and oxygen delivery by goal-directed fluid management and reducing intraoperative blood loss through use of antifibrinolytics (tranexamic acid [TXA]). Wound healing is promoted by maintaining normothermia and euglycemia perioperatively.</p>
<p class="indent">Postoperatively, oral hydration and nutrition are resumed as early as possible while attaining euglycemia. Multimodal analgesics are generally continued in combination with regional blocks, opioids, and nonopioid analgesics. Side effects such as nausea and vomiting are specifically treated, all with the goal of promoting patient comfort to engage in early mobilization, helping to reduce deconditioning and to prepare the patient for discharge.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>