<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec163">III. Anesthetic Management</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen419">A. Patient Selection</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Patients with cardiac disease, especially severe valvular heart, may not tolerate the cardiovascular effects of pneumoperitoneum. Similarly, morbidly obese patients, patients with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and those with severe cardiac disease may not be able to compensate for the <strong><em>steep Trendelenburg</em></strong> <a id="page573"></a>position often required for some laparoscopic or robotic-assisted surgery. Hence, careful cardiac assessment prior to surgery is required prior to surgery.</p>
<p class="indent">For routine laparoscopic cholecystectomy, obesity and even morbid obesity do not seem to increase the rate of significant complications.<sup><a href="ch027-sec08.xhtml#bib7">7</a></sup> There are many studies comparing single-site Robotic cholecystectomy (SSRC) and laparoscopic cholecystectomy. While there is no difference in operating time, bleeding, and incidence of complications, the risk of incisional hernia is higher with SSRC. Hence, case selection must be judicious for robotic procedures.<sup><a href="ch027-sec08.xhtml#bib8">8</a></sup></p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen420">B. Induction of Anesthesia and Airway Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><em>General endotracheal anesthesia</em></strong> is most often required for laparoscopic procedures because of the discomfort from the pneumoperitoneum and the required ventilatory support. Virtually any well-managed anesthetic induction technique is acceptable, but propofol may be the preferred agent for its antiemetic properties.<sup><a href="ch027-sec08.xhtml#bib9">9</a></sup> Use of a laryngeal mask airway instead of endotracheal intubation is reserved for patients undergoing short procedures requiring low insufflation pressures and minimal Trendelenburg.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen421">C. Maintenance of Anesthesia</h5>
<p class="nonindent">During positioning after intubation, the anesthesia team should be protective of the chest and face as they may come in contact with the longer than usual robotic instruments. However, they should also avoid cramming the surgical team in a small space. For example, no IV poles should be used that stand caudal to the patient&#x2019;s head, and preferably, the upper drape should fall over the patient&#x2019;s head or be lax enough to accommodate the long robotic instruments and leverage needed in the case. During positioning, the anesthesia provider should also be able to ascertain if there is any subcutaneous emphysema or abnormal sliding of the body on the table in the Trendelenburg position and notify the surgeon immediately if any of these complications occur.</p>
<p class="indent">Aggressive use of paralytic agents is essential in robotic surgery: emergency undocking may be needed when patients buck or move under the robot, as this may cause major vessel injury or even death. Intravenous or inhalational anesthetic may be used as per anesthesia provider preference and other patient concerns. However, <strong><em>nitrous oxide</em></strong> is usually avoided given the risk of worsening postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) and its potential for diffusing into and expanding the bowel, worsening surgical conditions. Total intravenous anesthesia can be used if the risk of PONV is significant. Controlled <strong><em>normocapnic ventilation</em></strong> with positive end-expiratory pressure is required for most laparoscopic and robot-assisted procedures to counter the respiratory impact of the pneumoperitoneum and positioning.</p>
<p class="indent">Monitoring other than the American Society of Anesthesiologists standards for general anesthesia should be dictated by each patient&#x2019;s comorbidities. Most cases, however, do not require an arterial or central line.</p>
<p class="indent">Hypertension is often seen during laparoscopic surgery due to hypercarbia- induced sympathetic stimulation and activation of the renin-angiotensin axis due to decreased renal blood flow. As this is reversible at the end of the procedure, agents employed to decrease blood pressure should ideally be short-acting and titrated slowly. Often an agent is chosen with the dual purposes of hemodynamic control and analgesic adjuvant potency in mind.<sup><a href="ch027-sec08.xhtml#bib10">10</a>,<a href="ch027-sec08.xhtml#bib11">11</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page574"></a>Due to the extremes of positioning and case duration sometimes required, adequate padding of the ulnar and common peroneal nerves, appropriate positioning of the arms and padding of the shoulders to avoid <strong><em>brachial plexus injury</em></strong>, and <strong><em>safety belt</em></strong> securing of the patient to the operating room table must be confirmed prior to incision. If the Trendelenburg or reverse Trendelenburg position is required, it should be achieved slowly to allow for management of hemodynamic changes or migration of the endotracheal tube. Prior to emergence, antiemetic medications should be administered because the incidence of PONV after laparoscopic procedures is high.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>