<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec132">V. Unique Positioning Problems With Catastrophic Results</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen344">A. Spinal Cord Ischemia With Hyperlordosis</h5>
<p class="nonindent">This rare event occurs when patients undergoing pelvic procedures (eg, prostatectomy) are placed in a hyperlordotic position, with &#x003E;15&#x00B0; of hyperflexion at the L2-3 interspace. This results in spinal cord ischemia, infarction, and devastating neurologic deficit. Magnetic resonance imaging is the most useful at detecting this condition. Operating room tables made in the United States are designed to limit hyperlordosis in supine patients, even when the table is maximally retroflexed with the kidney rest elevated. In almost all reported cases the table has been maximally retroflexed, the kidney rest has been elevated, and towels or blankets have been placed under the lower back to promote further anterior or forward pelvic tilt (to improve vision of deep pelvic structures). In general, anesthesiologists should not allow placement of materials under the lower back for this purpose.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen345">B. Thoracic Outlet Obstruction</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Thoracic outlet obstruction is a rare event that occurs when patients with this syndrome are positioned prone or, less commonly, laterally. In almost all reported cases, the shoulder has been abducted &#x003E;90&#x00B0;. In that position, the vasculature to the upper extremity is either compressed between the clavicle <a id="page475"></a>and rib cage or between the anterior and middle scalene muscles. This entrapment of the vasculature leads to upper extremity ischemia. When prolonged, the results range from minor disability to severe tissue loss that requires forequarter amputation. Simple preoperative questions such as &#x201C;Can you use your arms to work above your head for more than a minute?&#x201D; can elicit a history of thoracic outlet obstruction and reduce the risk of this potentially devastating complication.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen346">C. Steep Head-Down Positions</h5>
<p class="nonindent">As surgeons gain experience with new technologies (eg, robotics for pelvic procedures), they often request steep head-down positions. These positions can be associated with cephalad shifting of the anesthetized patient on an operating room table. Cephalad shifting can lead to cervical plexopathies from stretch and subclavian vessel obstruction from compression. There are reports of patients sliding off operating room tables when they are placed in steep head-down positions and not properly secured. The cervical spine and cerebral injuries have been devastating to both patients and members of the surgical team. Although intracranial pressure also increases, it rarely results in a negative outcome. However, orofacial edema requires careful attention as it may compromise the airway. In addition, permanent vision loss may be caused by venous congestion in the optic canal leading to optic nerve ischemia.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen347">D. Steep Head-Up Positions</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The steep head-up position&#x2014;also called the &#x201C;beach chair&#x201D; position&#x2014;is used to facilitate surgeries involving the posterior cranial fossa and cervical spine, as well as many shoulder procedures. In addition to the well-known risk of venous air embolism in the craniotomy patient, this position can have considerable hemodynamic impact, specifically on systemic and cerebral blood pressures.<sup><a href="ch022-sec06.xhtml#bib10">10</a></sup> Measuring mean arterial pressure at the level of the circle of Willis has been advised to maintain adequate cerebral perfusion pressure. In addition, a number of severe cases of brachial and cervical plexopathies have been reported. It appears that at least some of these plexopathies have been associated with nerve stretch or compression when patients have their heads fixated laterally during procedures.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen348">E. Soft Tissue Problems</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Skin and soft tissues are particularly vulnerable to sustained pressure, resulting in ischemia. Although there are many examples of this, several related to the prone position deserve special mention. Tissues in direct contact with rolls that extend from the shoulder girdle across the chest and to the pelvis may become ischemic with prolonged pressure (<strong><a href="ch022-sec01.xhtml#ff22-1">Figure 22.1</a></strong>). There are multiple cases of women with large breasts who have developed severe ischemia of one or both breasts because they had been pushed in between chest rolls. This pressure was sufficient to cause necrosis and sloughing. In most of these reported cases, the women subsequently underwent mastectomies. Similarly, ostomies have developed ischemia from pressure after they were placed in direct contact with these rolls.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>