<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/jquery.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
<!--<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-1.10.2.min.js'></script>-->
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-migrate-1.2.1.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery.qtip.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/etext.js'></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec183">VIII. Perioperative Ocular Complications</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen476">A. Corneal Abrasion</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Corneal abrasions are the most common ophthalmic complications after anesthesia. Decreased tear production and incomplete eyelid closure increase the susceptibility of the cornea to mechanical trauma. Chemical trauma and laser injuries may also occur.</p>
<p class="indent">Several risk factors have been correlated with corneal abrasion, including advanced age, high blood loss, Trendelenburg position, prolonged length of stay in the postanesthesia care unit (PACU), and oxygen supplementation during recovery. Sufferers report a foreign body sensation, photophobia, tearing, blurry vision, and pain that tends to increase with blinking. Corneal abrasions heal in 24 to 48 hours and rarely result in long-term sequelae.</p>
<p class="indent">Anesthesiologists must evaluate patients who complain of symptoms suggestive of a corneal abrasion. An eye examination usually reveals conjunctival injection with normally reactive pupils. One recommendation is to start ophthalmic antibiotic ointment immediately and continue four times daily for 48 hours. Erythromycin is the first-line therapy, while bacitracin may be used for patients with a contraindication to erythromycin. Patients may require evaluation by an ophthalmologist while in the hospital or shortly after discharge, depending on symptom severity. Topical nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) can mask unresolved damage and should not be used because unresolved pain is an important diagnostic sign of injury resolution. The affected eye should not be covered because it has not been shown to improve symptoms. Furthermore, the loss of binocular vision may place the patient at risk for falls or other accidents.</p>
<p class="indent">Precautions against corneal abrasions in the OR need to be considered on a case-by-case basis. Taping is the preferred method of eye protection; aggressive application and removal of tape have been associated with corneal abrasion and periocular soft tissue damage. Ointments must be used with care. Both petroleum-based and methylcellulose ointments can result in irritation and allergic reactions and may induce the patient to scratch their eyes.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen477">B. Perioperative Visual Loss</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Perioperative visual loss (POVL) is a rare but devastating complication with a prevalence of less than 0.1%. Cardiac and major spine surgery have the highest frequency of POVL. There are two major types of POVL: retinal artery occlusion (RAO) (central and branch) and ischemic optic neuropathy (ION).</p>
<h6 class="h6"><a id="page620"></a>1. Retinal Artery Occlusion</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Central retinal artery occlusion (CRAO) affects the entire retina and is associated with improper positioning and direct external pressure to the eye. Branch retinal artery occlusion (BRAO) has a segmental deficit distribution and is likely the result of microemboli and/or vasospasm. BRAO is associated with visual loss after cardiac surgery. Lastly, retrobulbar hemorrhage may result in ischemic ocular compartment syndrome.</p>
<p class="indent">All types of RAO have poor prognoses and no effective treatment. Therefore, prevention is critical: Prone patients must be positioned using modern foam headrests with cutouts or skull clamp, and goggles must not be used. Positioning and eyes must be checked every 20 minutes. Horseshoe headrests should not be used.</p>
<h6 class="h6">2. Ischemic Optic Neuropathy</h6>
<p class="nonindent">The causative factors of ION are poorly understood, but it is known that ION results from disruption of the blood supply to the optic nerve. Anterior ischemic optic neuropathy (AION) is associated with cardiac surgery. Posterior ischemic optic neuropathy (PION) is associated with lengthy spine surgery &#x003E;6 hours) when performed in the prone position, particularly cases with significant blood loss. There are also case reports of ION being associated with the steep Trendelenburg position during laparoscopic robotic radical prostatectomies.</p>
<p class="indent">As with RAO, there is no effective treatment for ION; therefore, prevention is paramount. The Postoperative Visual Loss Study Group recently identified the use of a Wilson frame as an independent significant risk factor; it is the only significant risk factor that is easily controllable.<sup><a href="#bib22">22</a></sup> The American Society of Anesthesiologists recommends positioning the head at or higher than the level of the heart and in a neutral position to prevent venous congestion.<sup><a href="#bib23">23</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Patients deemed to be at high risk for POVL after spinal surgery must be immediately evaluated postoperatively. In the event of positive findings or concerns, an immediate ophthalmology evaluation should occur. The following measures should also be instituted without delay: optimize hemoglobin/hematocrit, hemodynamics, and oxygenation; also, consider an MRI to rule out an intracranial cause.</p>
<p class="BIBLIOGRAPHYpTitle">References</p>
<ol class="ref"><li id="bib1">Groundine SB, Hollinger I, Jones J, DeBuono BA. New York State guidelines on the topical use of phenylephrine in the operating room. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2000;92:859-864. PMID: 10719965.</li>
<li id="bib2">Bluestone CD, Casselbrant ML, Stool SE, et al, eds. <em>Pediatric Otolaryngology</em>. Vol 1. Saunders; 2002.</li>
<li id="bib3">Isaacson G. Tonsillectomy care for the pediatrician. <em>Pediatrics</em>. 2012;130(2):324-334. PMID: 22753552.</li>
<li id="bib4">Shi M, Miao S, Gu T, Wang D, Zhang H, Liu J. Dexmedetomidine for the prevention of emergence delirium and postoperative behavioral changes in pediatric patients with sevoflurane anesthesia: a double-blind randomized trial. <em>Drug Des Devel Ther</em>. 2019;13:897-905. PMID: 30936683.</li>
<li id="bib5"><a id="page621"></a>Jeyakumar A, Brickman TM, Williamson ME, et al. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and postoperative bleeding following adenotonsillectomy in pediatric patients. <em>Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg</em>. 2008;134(1):24-27. PMID: 18209131.</li>
<li id="bib6">Perterson J, Losek JD. Post-tonsillectomy hemorrhage and pediatric emergency care. <em>Clin Pediatr (Phila)</em>. 2004;43(5):445-448. PMID: 15208749.</li>
<li id="bib7">Steketee KG, Reisdorff EJ. Emergency care for the Posttonsillectomy and Postadenoidectomy hemorrhage. <em>Am J Emerg Med</em>. 1995;13(5):518-523. PMID: 7662054.</li>
<li id="bib8">Malone E, Meakin GH. Acute stridor in children. <em>Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain</em>. 2007;7(6):183-186.</li>
<li id="bib9">Cot&#x00E9; CJ, Lerman J, Anderson BJ, eds. <em>A Practice of Anesthesia for Infants and Children</em>. Elsevier Saunders; 2013.</li>
<li id="bib10">Donlon JV. Anesthesia for eye, ear, nose, and throat surgery. In: Miller RD, Fleisher LA, Johns RA, et al, eds. <em>Miller&#x2019;s Anesthesia</em>. 6th ed. Elsiever; 2005:2527-2555.</li>
<li id="bib11">Sasaki K, Watahiki R, Tamura H, Ogura M, Shibuya M. Fluid extravasation of the articular capsule as a complication of temporomandibular joint pumping and perfusion. <em>Bull Tokyo Dent Coll</em>. 2002;43:237-242.</li>
<li id="bib12">Mariano ER. Anesthesia for otorhinolaryngology surgery. In: Butterworth JF, Mackey DC, Wasnick JD, ed. <em>Morgan &#x0026; Mikhail&#x2019;s Clinical Anesthesiology</em>. 5th ed. McGraw-Hill; 2013:773-787.</li>
<li id="bib13">Cauley BD, Anesthesia for head and neck surgery. In: Levine WC, Allain RM, Alston TA, et al eds. <em>Clinical Anesthesia Procedures of the Massachusetts General Hospital</em>. 8th ed. Lippincott Williams &#x0026; Wilkins; 2010:409-421.</li>
<li id="bib14">Murgatroyd H, Bembridge J. Intraocular pressure. <em>Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain</em>. 2008;8(3):100-103.</li>
<li id="bib15">Raw D, Mostafa SM. Drugs and the eye. <em>Br J Anaesth CEPD Reviews</em>. 2001;1:161-165.</li>
<li id="bib16">McGoldrick KE, Gayer SI. Anesthesia for ophthalmologic surgery. In: Barash PG, Cullen BF, et al, ed. <em>Clinical Anesthesia</em>. 7th ed. Lippincott Williams &#x0026; Wilkins; 2013:1373-1399.</li>
<li id="bib17">Wilson A, Soar J. <em>Open eye injury with full stomach</em>. In: <em>Anaesthesia for Emergency Eye Surgery</em>. 2000. Issue 11. Article 10: 1-2 pp 1 of 3.</li>
<li id="bib18">Lincoff HA, Breinin GM, DeVoe AG. Effect of succinylcholine on the extraocular muscles. <em>Am J Ophthalmol</em>. 1957;44:440-444.</li>
<li id="bib19">Hardy JF, Charest J, Girouard G, Lepage Y. Nausea and vomiting after strabismus surgery in preschool children. <em>Can Anaesth Soc J</em>. 1986;33:57-62. PMID: 3948048.</li>
<li id="bib20">Hunnigher A. Anesthesia for retinal detachment. <em>Br Med J</em>. 2008;336(7657):1325-1326. PMID: 18556286.</li>
<li id="bib21">Jaffe RA, Samuels SI, Schmiesing CA, et al, eds. <em>Anesthesiologist&#x2019;s Manual of Surgical Procedures</em>. 4th ed. LippIncott Williams and Wilkins; 2009.</li>
<li id="bib22">Roth S. Perioperative visual loss: what do we know, what can we do? <em>Br J Anaesth</em>. 2009;103(suppl 1):i31-i40. PMID: 20007988.</li>
<li id="bib23">American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Perioperative Visual Loss. Practice Advisory for perioperative visual loss associated with spine surgery: an updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Perioperative Visual Loss. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2012;116:275-285. PMID: 22227790.</li>
</ol>
<a id="page622"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp29_1" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_caf/29_Intraocular_Pressure_and_Anesthesia/story.html'">Infographic 29.1 A Closer Look at Intraocular Pressure and Anesthesia  <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<a id="page623"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp29_2" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/29A_Anesthesia_for_Otolaryngologic_Surgery/index.html'">Interactive Video Lecture 29a. Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<a id="page624"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp29_3" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/29B_Anesthesia_for_Ophthalmic_Surgery/index.html'">Interactive Video Lecture 29b. Anesthesia for Ophthalmic Surgery <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>