<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec150">III. Office-Based Anesthesia</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Office-based anesthesia involves anesthesia provided at a location other than a hospital or freestanding surgical facility. It is estimated that 17% to 24% of elective procedures are performed in the office setting.<sup><a href="ch025-sec04.xhtml#bib15">15</a></sup> The major incentives for office-based procedures are the financial benefits and convenience to the surgeon and patient. A potential disadvantage of being remote from a hospital is the lack of assistance in the event of an emergency. Current studies and review of closed claims data suggest an increased risk with an office-based anesthetic, with problems ranging from inadequate equipment, monitoring, and evaluation, to poor preparation and response to events. Almost half of the adverse events reported in office settings were classified as preventable. <a id="page538"></a>Though office-based surgery standards may differ from state to state, it should be clear that the standard of anesthesia care in an office-based setting is no different than anesthesia care completed in a hospital setting. The ASA statement from its Ambulatory Surgical Committee, last updated in October 2019, provides guidelines to assist those intending to perform ambulatory anesthesia in an office-based setting.<sup><a href="ch025-sec04.xhtml#bib16">16</a></sup></p>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt25-4"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;25.4</span> Post-Anesthetic Discharge Scoring System (PADSS)</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:33%;"></col>
<col style="width:33%;"></col>
<col style="width:34%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Parameter</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Value</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Score</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Vital signs</strong></p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">BP and pulse within 20% of preoperative level</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">2</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">&#x00A0;</td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">BP and pulse within 20%-40% of preoperative level</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">1</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">&#x00A0;</td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">BP and pulse greater than 40% different from preoperative level</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">0</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Activity</strong></p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Steady gait, no dizziness or meets preoperative level</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">2</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3">&#x00A0;</td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Requires assistance</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">1</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3">&#x00A0;</td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Unable to ambulate</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">0</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Nausea and vomiting</strong></p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Minimal/treated with oral medication</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">2</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">&#x00A0;</td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Moderate/treated with parenteral medication</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">1</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">&#x00A0;</td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Severe/continues despite treatment</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">0</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Pain</strong></p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Controlled with oral analgesics and acceptable to patient</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">2</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3">&#x00A0;</td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Uncontrolled or unacceptable to patient</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">1</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Surgical bleeding</strong></p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Minimal/no dressing changes</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">2</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">&#x00A0;</td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Moderate/up to two dressing changes required</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">1</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">&#x00A0;</td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Severe/more than three dressing changes required</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">0</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">From Chung F, Chan V, Ong D. A post anesthetic discharge scoring system for home readiness after ambulatory surgery. <em>J Clin Anesth</em>. 1995;7:500-506.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen391">A. Patient Selection and Preoperative Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The anesthesiologist should complete a thorough preoperative evaluation and feel confident that the planned procedure is within the scope of practice for the involved practitioners and the facility. Patients with significant comorbidities who are at risk for anesthetic or surgical complications are not appropriate candidates for office-based procedures and should be referred to an appropriate facility. <strong><a href="#tt25-5">Table 25.5</a></strong> provides suggestions for patients that may not be appropriate for an office-based procedure.<sup><a href="ch025-sec04.xhtml#bib17">17</a></sup> Longer surgical procedures have a greater likelihood of postoperative complications and need for hospital admission. Many facilities plan to have procedures completed by early afternoon to provide for complete recovery prior to discharge from the facility.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen392">B. Equipment and Monitoring</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Office surgery locations must be equipped appropriately. At a minimum, the facility should have a reliable oxygen source, suction, resuscitation equipment, and emergency drugs. It is mandatory that all machines be current, in functioning order, and serviced as per manufacturer&#x2019;s guidelines. All ASA standard monitors are required, including pulse oximetry, capnography, BP, continuous ECG, and the ability to measure temperature. A selection of suitable<a id="page539"></a> airway equipment is needed, including a spectrum of oxygen delivery devices from nasal cannula to intubation equipment, as well as emergency airway supplies such as a self-inflating (Ambu) ventilation bag. Suction must also be available. If pediatrics patients are treated in the facility, appropriately sized equipment and resuscitation devices must be available. Medications for the treatment of malignant hyperthermia must be available when triggering agents (succinylcholine or volatile anesthetics) are used. Emergency medications and a crash cart including a defibrillator are essential. Written protocols need to be in place to ensure the safe and timely transfer of patients who may require extended emergency or in-hospital services.</p>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt25-5"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;25.5</span> Patients Not Suitable for Office-Based Anesthesia</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:33%;"></col>
<col style="width:33%;"></col>
<col style="width:34%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Cardiac conditions:</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Activity level &#x003C;4 METs</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Unstable angina</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;MI: 0-3&#x00A0;mo</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;MI: 3-6&#x00A0;mo, must have evaluation by cardiologist before surgery</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Severe cardiomyopathy</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Poorly controlled Hypertension</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Internal defibrillator or pacemaker</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Heart transplant recipient/candidate</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Pulmonary conditions:</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Obstructive sleep apnea</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Airway abnormality</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Previous difficult intubation</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Asthma: &#x003C;6&#x00A0;mo since last Emergency department visit/acute exacerbation</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Lung transplant recipient/candidate</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Central nervous system:</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Multiple sclerosis</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Stroke &#x003C;6&#x00A0;mo prior</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Para-/quadriplegia</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Seizure disorder</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Psychological instability</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Dementia with disorientation</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Renal:</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Creatinine &#x003E; 2&#x00A0;mg/dL</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;End-stage renal disease on dialysis</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;On special diet due to renal disease</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Kidney transplant candidate</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Hepatic:</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Elevated bilirubin or transaminases</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Liver transplant candidate</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Endocrine:</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Morbid obesity with BMI &#x003E;35&#x00A0;mg/kg</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Poorly controlled diabetes mellitus</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Hemoglobin A1c &#x003E; 8%</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Type I diabetes mellitus</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Hematologic:</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Sickle cell disease</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Anticoagulant therapy</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;von Willebrand disease</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Hemophilia</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Musculoskeletal:</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;History of malignant hyperthermia</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Myasthenia gravis</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Muscular dystrophy or myopathy</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Other:</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Alcohol/substance overuse</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;No adult escort</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">BMI, body mass index; METs, metabolic equivalents; MI, myocardial infarction.</p>
<p class="u_tfoot">Adapted from Ahmad S. Office based &#x2013; is my anesthetic care any different? Assessment and management. <em>Anesthesiol Clin</em>. 2010;28:369-384.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen393">C. Safety and Organization</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Each facility should have a medical director who is in charge of delineating the responsibilities of each staff member. Clear policies and procedures should be available and reviewed annually. All local and federal regulations must be followed, and all practitioners need to hold current and valid<a id="page540"></a> licenses appropriate for their assigned duties. It is the responsibility of the anesthesiologist to participate in quality improvement and risk management projects. The building construction should comply with rules pertaining to fire prevention and proper disposal of medical and hazardous waste. At least one member of the staff must be certified in advanced cardiovascular life support (ACLS) and remain present until all patients have been discharged from the facility.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen394">D. Anesthetic Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Similar to ambulatory anesthesia, the choice of anesthetic in the office setting is based on the need to facilitate rapid discharge and minimize adverse side effects. Cost of anesthetic equipment and medications may also be a factor.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>