<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec129">II. Mechanisms of Soft Tissue Injury</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen340">A. Stretch</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Peripheral nerves are vascularized by a complex of short nutrient arteries called the vasa nervosum (<strong><a href="ch022-sec03.xhtml#ff22-2">Figure 22.2</a></strong>). These minute arteries profusely anastomose to form an unbroken intraneural net. This net rarely leaves any particular segment of a peripheral nerve dependent on a single vessel for nutrient support. This net is not seen as commonly in central nerve tissue.</p>
<a id="page465"></a>
<p class="indent">Stretch of nerve tissue, especially to more than 5% of resting length, may kink or reduce the lumens of feeding arterioles and draining venules.<sup><a href="ch022-sec06.xhtml#bib4">4</a></sup> This phenomenon can lead to direct ischemia from reduced arteriole blood flow, as well as indirect ischemia from venous congestion, increased intraneural pressure, and the need for high driving pressures for arteriolar blood flow. Prolonged periods of ischemia may cause transient or permanent nerve injury. The lack of extensive vascular nets in central nervous tissue suggests that stretch may be less well tolerated.</p>
<p class="indent">Soft tissue is usually less susceptible to stretch injury than nervous tissue. Soft tissue is often more compliant and elastic, and many peripheral soft tissues do not need the same level of blood flow as nervous tissue. Nonetheless, prolonged stretch of any soft tissue may result in ischemia and tissue injury. Unique perioperative patient positions may increase the risk of soft tissue stretch (eg, prone positions and their impact on breast tissue) (<strong><a href="ch022-sec01.xhtml#ff22-1">Figure 22.1</a></strong>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen341">B. Compression</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Direct pressure on soft and nerve tissues may reduce local blood flow and disrupt cellular integrity, resulting in tissue edema, ischemia, and, if prolonged, necrosis. The impact is especially damaging to ischemic-susceptible tissue (eg, stomas associated with gastrointestinal diversions into cutaneous stomas) (<strong><a href="ch022-sec01.xhtml#ff22-1">Figure 22.1</a></strong>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>