<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec137">IV. Fluid Replacement Therapy</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Maintenance of sufficient intravascular volume to support organ perfusion is the chief goal of perioperative fluid administration. Perioperative intravascular volume depletion (ie, <strong><em>hypovolemia</em></strong>) is common for various reasons, including prolonged preoperative starvation (NPO) status, sepsis, hyperthermia, chronic diuretic use, uncontrolled hyperglycemia, vomiting, and diarrhea. Hypovolemia results in organ hypoperfusion, tissue hypoxia, acidosis, and arterial hypotension. Replacing any existing fluid deficit and administering maintenance intravenous fluids to achieve normovolemia both promote adequate organ perfusion pressure and tissue oxygenation, thereby improving surgical outcomes.<sup><a href="ch023-sec07.xhtml#bib3">3</a>,<a href="ch023-sec07.xhtml#bib4">4</a></sup> Although hypovolemia is often the main concern perioperatively, excessive fluid administration leading to volume overload has been shown to increase postoperative complications. <strong><em>Hypervolemia</em></strong> increases the risk for bowel edema, nausea, vomiting, pulmonary edema, and decompensated heart failure. Thus, obtaining a detailed history and accurate preoperative assessment of volume status (see below) are important factors when managing fluid perioperatively.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Maintenance of sufficient intravascular volume to support organ perfusion, tissue oxygenation, and aerobic metabolism is the chief goal of perioperative fluid administration.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen358">A. Maintenance Requirements for Water, Sodium, and Potassium</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Under normal physiologic conditions, the average adult loses approximately 1500&#x00A0;mL of water daily from perspiration, respiration, feces, and urine. Sodium and potassium losses are minimal and replacement is roughly 1&#x00A0;mmol/kg daily. Generally these daily water and electrolyte requirements are easily achieved with oral intake. However, various disease states alter normal electrolyte balance, resulting in severe abnormalities, and can pose great challenges to perioperative fluid administration.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen359">B. Glucose Requirements and Dextrose</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Blood glucose is under tight hormonal control, such that a healthy adult is capable of maintaining normal blood glucose levels for weeks without caloric intake. Thus, blood glucose is not routinely monitored in healthy adults, nor are dextrose-containing fluids routinely administered. However, patients with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus are susceptible to both <strong><em>hypoglycemia</em></strong> and <strong><em>hyperglycemia</em></strong>; therefore, blood glucose should be carefully monitored in these patients perioperatively. In addition, infants younger than 6&#x00A0;months have limited glycogen stores, are susceptible to hypoglycemia after short periods of fasting, and typically receive dextrose-containing fluids perioperatively.</p>
<a id="page490"></a>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen360">C. Surgical Fluid Requirements</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Traditional teaching surrounding the estimation of perioperative fluid deficit and the calculation of maintenance intravenous fluid has relied upon a seminal 1957 study by Holliday and Segar that generated the often-quoted &#x201C;4-2-1 rule&#x201D; of maintenance fluid management based on body weight (ie, hourly hypotonic fluid requirement is 4&#x00A0;mL/kg for the first 10&#x00A0;kg, 2&#x00A0;mL/kg for the second 10&#x00A0;kg, and 1&#x00A0;mL/kg for all remaining kilograms).<sup><a href="ch023-sec07.xhtml#bib5">5</a></sup> However, application of this method fails to account for a number of physiologic factors and can lead to hypervolemia and hyponatremia that are associated with increased postoperative complications, including longer hospital stay, pulmonary edema, pneumonia, and ileus. Thus, current practice is to use isotonic solutions for maintenance fluid, with superior outcomes demonstrated for balanced electrolyte solutions over normal saline.</p>
<p class="indent">Despite numerous studies, controversy still exists over optimal perioperative fluid management. However, recent studies have demonstrated improved outcomes when fluid therapy is based on specific clinical criteria. Notably, consensus guidelines from the Enhanced Recovery Partnership recommend the use of <strong><em>goal-directed fluid management</em></strong> for patients who are acutely ill, undergoing major surgery, or have comorbidities that warrant cardiac output monitoring, but not for patients undergoing low-risk surgery.<sup><a href="ch023-sec07.xhtml#bib6">6</a></sup> However, evidence does not support a single, specific hemodynamic goal or method of measurement. The authors advocate for using the related measures of &#x201C;pulse pressure variation&#x201D; and &#x201C;stroke volume variation&#x201D; (discussed below) when performing goal-directed fluid management as outlined above. This approach treats fluid therapy as a medication that is administered using the &#x201C;five rights&#x201D; rule-of-thumb: administer the right drug, at the right dose, to the right patient, via the right route, and at the right time. Furthermore, intraoperative maintenance fluids should be limited to 2&#x00A0;mL/kg/h (including drug infusions). Postoperatively, intravenous fluids should be limited and oral hydration resumed as soon as possible.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>