<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec131">IV. Practical Considerations to Prevent Perioperative Peripheral Neuropathies</h4>
<p class="nonindent">There are several practical considerations that should be taken to prevent perioperative peripheral neuropathies. These include:</p>
<a id="page474"></a>
<ul class="u_bullb"><li><span>Use padding to distribute compressive forces. Although there are few studies that demonstrate generous padding can impact the frequency or severity of perioperative neuropathies, it makes sense to distribute the point of pressure. Furthermore, from a medicolegal perspective, juries find the use of padding to be a positive intervention.</span></li>
<li><span>Position joints to avoid excessive stretching, recognizing that stretch of any nerve &#x003E;5% of its resting length over a prolonged period results in varying degrees of ischemia and dysfunction.</span></li>
<li><span>Prevention of positioning-related injuries requires a team approach. Multidisciplinary discussions between surgeons and anesthesiologists are important in order to identify surgical candidates who may be at increased risk of nerve or soft tissue injury. This is especially true with the increasing use of robotic-assisted procedures that require a steep Trendelenburg and lithotomy positioning. Mills and colleagues have shown injuries to be more likely for case with median durations of &#x2265;5.5 hours.<sup><a href="ch022-sec06.xhtml#bib9">9</a></sup> Teams should have heightened consideration for returning patients to the supine position as soon as possible after undocking of robotic arms.</span></li></ul>
<p class="indent">The management of the patient with a new-onset peripheral neuropathy after surgery depends on the nature of the symptoms. If the loss is sensory only, it is reasonable to follow up with the patient daily for up to 5&#x00A0;days. Many sensory deficits in the immediate postoperative period will resolve during this time. If the deficit persists for longer than 5&#x00A0;days, it is likely that the neuropathy will have an extended impact. It is appropriate at that point to get a family physician, internist, or neurologist involved to provide long-term care. If the loss is motor or combined sensory and motor, it is prudent to get a neurologist involved early. These patients likely have a significant neuropathy and will need prolonged rehabilitative care.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>