<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/jquery.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
<!--<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-1.10.2.min.js'></script>-->
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-migrate-1.2.1.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery.qtip.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/etext.js'></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec133">VI. Summary</h4>
<p class="nonindent">There are many potential etiologies of positioning injuries during surgery. Peripheral nerve injuries due to compression, stretch, or generalized ischemia are among the most common. Surgeries requiring a position other than supine<a id="page476"></a> are associated with an increased risk of nerve injury. Prevention is the most reliable way to reduce the risk of injuries. When possible, patients should position themselves while awake before administering sedatives or anesthesia. Pressure points should be carefully padded. Vigilance of the entire surgical team is required to minimize patient risk.</p>
<p class="BIBLIOGRAPHYpTitle">References</p>
<ol class="ref"><li id="bib1">Chui J, Murkin JM, Posner KL, Domino KB. Perioperative peripheral nerve injury after general anesthesia: a qualitative systematic review. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2018;127:134-143. PMID: 29787414.</li>
<li id="bib2">Warner MA, Warner DO, Matsumoto JY, et al. Ulnar neuropathy in surgical patients. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 1999;90:54-59. PMID: 9915312.</li>
<li id="bib3">Staff NP, Engelstad J, Klein CJ, et al. Post-surgical inflammatory neuropathy. <em>Brain</em>. 2010;133:2866-2880. PMID: 20846945.</li>
<li id="bib4">Warner ME, Johnson RL. Patient positioning and related injuries. In: Barash PG, Cullen BF, Stoelting RK, et al, eds. <em>Clinical Anesthesia</em>. 8th ed. Wolters Kluwer; 2017:809-825.</li>
<li id="bib5">Practice advisory for the prevention of perioperative peripheral neuropathies 2018. An updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on prevention of perioperative peripheral neuropathies. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2018;128:11-26. PMID: 29116945.</li>
<li id="bib6">Contreras MG, Warner MA, Charboneau WJ, et al. Anatomy of the ulnar nerve at the elbow: potential relationship of acute ulnar neuropathy to gender differences. <em>Clin Anat</em>. 1998;11:372-378. PMID: 9800916.</li>
<li id="bib7">Gelberman RH, Yamaguchi K, Hollstien SB, et al. Changes in interstitial pressure and cross-sectional area of the cubital tunnel and of the ulnar nerve with flexion of the elbow. An experimental study in human cadavera. <em>J Bone Joint Surg</em>. 1998;80(4):492-501. PMID: 9563378.</li>
<li id="bib8">Litwiller JP, Wells RE, Halliwill JR, et al. Effect of lithotomy positions on strain of the obturator and lateral femoral cutaneous nerves. <em>Clin Anat</em>. 2004;17:45-49. PMID: 14695587.</li>
<li id="bib9">Mills JT, Burris MB, Warburton DJ, et al. Positioning injuries with robotic assisted urological surgery. <em>J Urol</em>. 2013;190:580-584. PMID: 23466240.</li>
<li id="bib10">Lee LA, Caplan RA. APSF workshop: cerebral perfusion experts share views on management of head-up cases. <em>APSF Newsletter</em>. 2009-2010;24(4):45-48.</li></ol>
<a id="page477"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp22_1" onclick="openLinkInNewTab('https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_caf/22_Perioperative_Nerve_Injuries/story.html');">Infographic 22.1 Perioperative Nerve Injuries At a Glance <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<div class="link-me" id="grp22_2" onclick="openLinkInNewTab('https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/22_Patient_Positioning_and_Potential_Injuries/index.html');">Interactive Video Lecture 22. Patient Positioning and Potential Injuries <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>