<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec165">V. Intraoperative Complications</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen422">A. Cardiopulmonary Complications</h5>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><em>Hypotension</em></strong> is quite common during the initial insufflation of the peritoneum due to reduced cardiac output secondary to decreased venous return. Less commonly, a vagal response to stretching of the peritoneum causes significant bradycardia and very <strong><em>rarely asystole</em></strong>. Hypertension or tachycardia can result from hypercarbia-induced catecholamine release or, more commonly, inadequate anesthesia. All of these changes in hemodynamics are readily managed with routine measures and should be quite transient. However, profound, persistent hypotension or cardiovascular collapse can occur very rarely. This should warrant an urgent search and treatment of possible etiologies, including but not limited to excessive intra-abdominal pressure, <strong><em>CO</em></strong><strong><em><sub>2</sub></em></strong> <strong><em>embolism</em></strong>, and <strong><em>pneumothorax</em></strong> (<strong><a href="#tt27-2">Table 27.2</a></strong>). Although pneumoperitoneum and Trendelenburg positioning increase ventilation and perfusion mismatching, significant hypoxia is uncommon during controlled ventilation with supplemental oxygen unless the patient has preexisting pulmonary disease. Should hypoxia persist despite administration of 100% oxygen, positive end-expiratory pressure, and alveolar recruitment maneuvers; the intra-abdominal pressure should be lowered and other potential etiologies investigated, including endobronchial intubation, pulmonary aspiration, and pneumothorax.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Subcutaneous emphysema with CO<sub>2</sub> is common after laparoscopy and can extend all the way to the neck with potential post-extubation airway compromise.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen423">B. Surgical Complications</h5>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>1. Carbon Dioxide Extravasation</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><em>Subcutaneous emphysema</em></strong> is one of the most common complications of extraperitoneal insufflation of CO<sub>2</sub>. This complication is more likely to occur when five or more ports are used for the laparoscopic procedure, during procedures longer than 3.5 hours with intra-abdominal pressures &#x003E;15&#x00A0;mm Hg, and with improper position of the cannulas. It should be suspected by a rise in end-tidal CO<sub>2</sub> of more than 25% or to more than 50&#x00A0;mm Hg occurring after end-tidal CO<sub>2</sub> has already plateaued. It is confirmed by the presence of crepitus (<strong><a href="#tt27-3">Table 27.3</a></strong>).</p>
<a id="page575"></a>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt27-2"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;27.2</span> Cardiovascular Complications During Laparoscopy</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:45%;"></col>
<col style="width:55%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Complication</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Mechanism</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Hypotension</strong></p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Decreased venous return</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Hypertension</strong></p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Hypercarbia</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Neurohumoral factors</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Bradyarrhythmias</strong></p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Vagal reaction to peritoneal stretching</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Tachyarrhythmias</strong></p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Hypercarbia</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Cardiovascular collapse</strong></p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Arrhythmias (tachy/bradyarrhythmias)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Blood loss</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Gas embolism</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Capno-/pneumothorax</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Capnopericardium</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Cardiac ischemia</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Excessive intra-abdominal pressure</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Hypercapnia</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Deep anesthesia</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="indent">Subcutaneous emphysema can extend into the thorax or mediastinum, as <strong><em>capnothorax</em></strong> and <strong><em>capnomediastinum</em></strong>, and into the upper torso or neck as well as toward the groin.</p>
<p class="video"><video data-id="rhsv38UK" controls="controls" class="jwp-video" crossorigin="anonymous" style="width:100%; height:auto; width:320px; height:240px;">Browser issues</video></p>
<p class="video1" id="vid27-1"><strong>VIDEO 27.1</strong></p>
<p class="video2"><strong>CO</strong><sub>2</sub> <strong>Embolism</strong></p>
<p class="indent">Treatment should include deflation of the abdomen and reinflation at lower pressures with confirmation of correct cannula positioning. The presence of subcutaneous emphysema in the neck should raise the question of a possible capnothorax, especially if airway pressures are increased or arterial saturation decreased. Unlike an intraoperative pneumothorax, which presents with increased PaCO<sub>2</sub> and decreased end-tidal CO<sub>2</sub>, a capnothorax presents with both increased (<strong><a href="#tt27-3">Table 27.3</a></strong>). If blood pressure is well maintained, capnothorax can be treated conservatively by deflation of the abdomen. In the event of a tension capnothorax, as evidenced by tracheal deviation and hypotension, the tension should be vented by a needle thoracostomy and continued mechanical ventilation with positive end-expiratory pressure. Capnopericardium and capnomediastinum are rare complications of laparoscopy; they are diagnosed by chest x ray and treated by deflation of the abdomen and supportive care during spontaneous resolution.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Capnopericardium and capnomediastinum are rare complications of laparoscopy, diagnosed by chest X-ray, and treated by deflation of the abdomen and supportive care during spontaneous resolution.</p>
</div>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>2. Carbon Dioxide Embolization</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">CO<sub>2</sub> intravascular embolization is a serious but <strong><em>rare complication</em></strong> of laparoscopy, usually the consequence of direct insufflation of CO<sub>2</sub> into a vessel or, alternatively, into a solid organ with subsequent intravascular migration. Due to the high blood solubility of CO<sub>2</sub>, relatively large amounts of it can be absorbed by the blood and eliminated by the lungs. Thus, a small volume of embolized CO<sub>2</sub> may have no apparent impact except an increase in the end-tidal CO<sub>2</sub>. However, a large bolus can impede venous return to the heart, distend the right atrium and ventricle, and produce <strong><em>cardiovascular collapse</em></strong>. The acute increase in the right atrial pressure can lead to paradoxical embolism through a foramen ovale and the potential for neurologic injury. A large intravascular CO<sub>2</sub> embolism should be suspected when sudden, severe hypotension is accompanied by a marked decrease in end-tidal CO<sub>2</sub> occurring during insufflation (<strong><a href="#tt27-3">Table 27.3</a></strong>). Treatment should include immediate cessation of insufflation and deflation of the abdomen, placement of the patient in a head-down, left <strong><em>lateral decubitus position</em></strong>, which limits migration of the embolus into the pulmonary artery, hyperventilation in order to speed the elimination of CO<sub>2</sub>, and hemodynamic support including cardiac massage if indicated.</p>
<a id="page576"></a>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt27-3"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;27.3</span> Complications of Pneumoperitoneum</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:25%;"></col>
<col style="width:25%;"></col>
<col style="width:25%;"></col>
<col style="width:25%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Complication</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Mechanism</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Diagnosis</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Management</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>CO</strong><strong><sub>2</sub></strong> <strong>subcutaneous emphysema</strong></p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Extraperitoneal insufflation in subcutaneous, preperitoneal, or retroperitoneal tissue</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Extension of extraperitoneal insufflation</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Sudden rise in ETCO<sub>2</sub></p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Crepitus</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">If postoperatively, signs of hypercarbia (increased heart rate, blood pressure), somnolence</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Deflation of the abdomen</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Capnothorax</strong></p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Tracking of insufflated CO<sub>2</sub> around the aortic, caval, and esophageal hiatuses of the diaphragm into the mediastinum with subsequent rupture into the pleural space</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Tracking of CO<sub>2</sub> through diaphragmatic defects</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Diaphragmatic injury when inserting the laparoscopic needle</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">High index of suspicion (subcutaneous emphysema of the neck), site of surgical procedure</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Increased airway pressure</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Decreased SaO<sub>2</sub></p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Increased ETCO<sub>2</sub></p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Bulging hemidiaphragm</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">If tension capnothorax, hypotension, decreased ETCO<sub>2</sub>, and cardiovascular collapse</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Confirmation by chest x-ray</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Discontinuation of N<sub>2</sub>O</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Hyperventilation</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Apply PEEP</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Capnomediastinum</strong></p>
<p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Capnopericardium</strong></p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Same as for capnothorax</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Hemodynamic changes</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Confirmation by chest x-ray</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Deflation of the abdomen</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Supportive care</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Hyperventilation</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Endobronchial intubation</strong></p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Cephalad migration of the carina</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Steep increase in peak airway pressure</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Decrease in SaO<sub>2</sub></p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Reposition the endotracheal tube</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Gas embolism</strong></p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Placement of the Veress needle into a blood vessel</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Passage of CO<sub>2</sub> into the abdominal wall and peritoneal vessels</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Hypoxemia</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Hypotension</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Decreased ETCO<sub>2</sub></p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Arrhythmias or right heart strain on ECG</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Deflation of the abdomen</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Supportive treatment/cardiovascular resuscitation</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Hyperventilation</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">CO<sub>2</sub>, carbon dioxide; N<sub>2</sub>O, nitrous oxide; PEEP, positive end-expiratory pressure; SaO<sub>2</sub>, oxygen saturation; ETCO<sub>2</sub>, end-tidal carbon dioxide; ECG, electrocardiogram.</p>
</div>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">In the event that a trocar punctures a major vessel, it should be left in place to help tamponade the bleeding while the abdomen is open and the vessel repaired.</p>
</div>
<p class="video"><video data-id="6Agrqcqh" controls="controls" class="jwp-video" crossorigin="anonymous" style="width:100%; height:auto; width:320px; height:240px;">Browser issues</video></p>
<p class="video1" id="vid27-2"><strong>VIDEO 27.2</strong></p>
<p class="video2"><strong>Esophageal Bougie</strong></p>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>3. Other Surgical Complications</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">Direct injury to vascular structures or the bowel or bladder may occur during trocar or Veress needle placement. Major <strong><em>vascular injuries</em></strong> have a low incidence (0.02% to 0.03%) but can be catastrophic when a trocar is placed into the aorta, vena cava, or iliac vessels causing <strong><em>massive bleeding</em></strong>. When a major vessel injury occurs, the trocar should be left in place to tamponade bleeding while the surgical team opens the abdomen to control the damage. Bowel and major organ injuries occur in up to 0.4% of laparoscopy cases and are the result of trocar misplacement. Most of the injuries involve the stomach, duodenum, and small and large bowel. Prior abdominal surgery leading to <a id="page577"></a>adhesions is a definite risk factor, and most of the bowel injuries go unrecognized until the postoperative period when the patient develops peritonitis.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen424">C. Hypothermia</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Severe hypothermia is a significant risk during laparoscopy because, in addition to the usual mechanisms of heat loss during anesthesia (convection, conduction, radiation, and evaporation), insufflation of cold CO<sub>2</sub> (at 23 &#x00B0;C) causes additional heat loss. This loss can be limited by restricting CO<sub>2</sub> flow and leakage and by forced air warming of the patient&#x2019;s upper and lower body.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Cephalad slippage of the patient and the cephalad movement of the diaphragm during steep Trendelenburg can result in movement of the endotracheal tube into the right main stem bronchus.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen425">D. Complications Related to Positioning</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Nerve and tissue injuries are serious and preventable complications of positioning, especially in patients undergoing robotic-assisted laparoscopy in the steep Trendelenburg position. Cephalad slippage of the patient can injure nerves and soft tissues by causing pressure points or tissue stretch. If shoulder restraints are used to stabilize the patient, they can apply stretch to the <strong><em>brachial plexus</em></strong>. In addition, over the course of hours, steep Trendelenburg can lead to severe head, neck, and facial swelling, resulting in postextubation airway compromise or, in very rare cases, blindness due to optic nerve ischemia. <a href="ch022.xhtml">Chapter 22</a> provides a detailed discussion of these risks and preventive measures.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Steep Trendelenburg positioning has been associated with blindness due to optic nerve ischemia.</p>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>