<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec145">V. Perioperative Alternatives to Transfusion</h4>
<p class="nonindent">The risks of transfusion are indisputable. Even 1 unit of PRBCs can significantly increase perioperative morbidity. Fortunately, there are some blood conservation strategies to minimize allogenic RBC transfusion. Experts in transfusion medicine advocate for Patient Blood Management (PBM) programs defined by the AABB as &#x201C;an evidence-based, multidisciplinary approach to optimizing the care of patients who might need transfusion.&#x201D; PBM uses preventive strategies and active management protocols to optimize patients prior to surgery and mitigate the risks of acute anemia and transfusion during active hemorrhage, while minimizing the incidence of adverse reactions to blood component therapy.<sup><a href="ch024-sec07.xhtml#bib7">7</a>,<a href="ch024-sec07.xhtml#bib8">8</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Preoperative anemia is an independent risk factor for perioperative blood transfusion, morbidity, and mortality. Thus, strategies to conserve and even increase the patient&#x2019;s hemoglobin concentration prior to surgery should be considered for all elective cases. There should be a thorough preoperative diagnostic workup for the cause of the anemia and, if indicated, aggressive treatment of an iron deficiency or replacement of vitamin deficiencies (eg, vitamin B<sub>12</sub> or folic acid). With a longer lead time before surgery for diagnosis and treatment of anemia, fewer patients require perioperative transfusion.<sup><a href="ch024-sec07.xhtml#bib7">7</a>,<a href="ch024-sec07.xhtml#bib8">8</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent"><strong><em>Iron therapy</em></strong> is an important consideration for patients with preoperative anemia secondary to iron deficiency. Oral formulations for iron replacement are often associated with gastrointestinal upset and therefore poorly tolerated by patients long enough for them to be effective. However, intravenous iron therapy is more readily available as iron sucrose and iron gluconate, which carry far less risk of anaphylaxis than previous formulations.<sup><a href="ch024-sec07.xhtml#bib8">8</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent"><strong><em>Erythropoietin</em></strong> is the most common erythropoiesis-stimulating agent (ESA) approved for use in patients with end-stage renal disease, presurgical anemia, and chemotherapy or malignancy-associated anemia. Erythropoietin increases RBC production in the bone marrow and has been shown to reduce allogenic transfusion requirements when used prior to orthopedic and cardiac surgery, especially if administered with iron repletion.<sup><a href="ch024-sec07.xhtml#bib8">8</a></sup> However, it carries a significant risk of venous and arterial thromboembolism and therefore should be used conservatively and with close patient monitoring.<sup><a href="ch024-sec07.xhtml#bib7">7</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent"><strong><em>Autologous blood donation</em></strong> (collection and saving of the patient&#x2019;s own blood for later use) reduces several of the risks associated with allogenic blood transfusion, including viral infection and immune reactions such as TRALI and alloimmunization. However, preoperative autologous donation has not been shown to reduce perioperative allogenic transfusion due to the resultant lower preoperative hemoglobin concentration. Autologous blood donation still carries the risks associated with clerical error, bacterial contamination, TACO, and storage lesions. Furthermore, there is significant risk of donated blood expiring prior to surgery date if surgery is postponed or delayed for any cause. Certain<a id="page514"></a> patients may be candidates for autologous transfusion if they have antibodies to high-prevalence blood antigens, multiple alloantibodies, or they refuse allogenic transfusion and are at risk for significant surgical blood loss; in those cases, ESAs should be used in conjunction with preoperative donation.<sup><a href="ch024-sec07.xhtml#bib8">8</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent"><strong><em>Acute normovolemic hemodilution</em></strong> involves the removal of 2 or 3 units of whole blood with volume replacement with intravenous fluids immediately preincision. The blood is typically stored in the operating room but may be preserved for 8 hours prior to reinfusion. This results in the patient losing blood at a lower hematocrit during surgery and for the patient to be resuscitated with autologous whole fresh blood after most of the surgical blood loss has resolved. This method is very efficacious in young healthy patients who can tolerate intraoperative anemia without risk of end-organ hypoxia or for patients who have a higher risk of transfusion reactions from allogenic blood products. It can also be considered for patients who refuse allogenic transfusions including those of the Jehovah&#x2019;s Witness faith as the blood removed can be kept in continuity with the patient at their request.<sup><a href="ch024-sec07.xhtml#bib8">8</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent"><strong><em>Perioperative blood salvage</em></strong> with intraoperative &#x201C;cell saver&#x201D; technology or postoperative intracompartment cell salvage is the most used and efficacious method for perioperative blood conservation. Especially in orthopedic surgery for total knee arthroplasty and hip replacement, perioperative cell salvage has significantly decreased patient risk for blood transfusion. Postoperative cell salvage is generally limited to orthopedic surgery as mediastinal cell salvage after cardiac and thoracic surgery has been associated with worse postoperative bleeding and morbidity.</p>
<p class="video"><video data-id="a5kTRDsX" controls="controls" class="jwp-video" crossorigin="anonymous" style="width:100%; height:auto; width:320px; height:240px;">Browser issues</video></p>
<p class="video1" id="vid24-2"><strong>VIDEO 24.2</strong></p>
<p class="video2"><strong>Intraoperative Blood Salvage</strong></p>
<p class="indent">Intraoperative RBC salvage systems typically involve three phases, all of which must be run by trained operators to optimize RBC return and minimize risks. Shed blood is first anticoagulated and collected with limited variable suctioning to minimize the detrimental effects of sheer forces. Inefficient collection may increase the risk of hemolysis. Suction of wounds contaminated with frank infection, ruptured tumor sections, amniotic fluid, metal, or pharmaceutical compounds may increase the risks associated with cell salvage. Generally, leucodepletion filters limit the white blood cells and contaminants, including tumor cells and amniotic fluid contents, from entering the collection chamber. Thus, intraoperative cell salvage systems remain acceptable in obstetrics, as well as any procedures with anticipated blood loss &#x003E;1000&#x00A0;mL. Collected blood is centrifuged, washed, filtered, and reconstituted to a resultant hematocrit of 45% to 55%.<sup><a href="ch024-sec07.xhtml#bib8">8</a></sup> Meta-analysis of studies using cell salvage in urologic and gynecologic cancer surgery demonstrates that it is safe and is not associated with additional risk of tumor recurrence or metastasis. Risks associated with reinfusion of salvaged RBCs include air embolism and hemolysis. But these risks are minimal when the system is used properly and still negligible when compared with the risk of allogeneic blood transfusion.</p>
<p class="indent">Overall, perioperative blood salvage is cost-efficient, low risk, and clinically effective at reducing the need for RBC transfusion. It is particularly important when considering use of perioperative blood conservation strategies for patients requiring rare blood types and those who are Jehovah&#x2019;s Witnesses, who generally refuse any transfusion when RBCs have been removed from the body. Often Jehovah&#x2019;s Witness patients will accept RBC salvage if the salvaged blood remains in continuity with the patient. This is easily established with a primed venous line attached to the reinfusion bag of the cell savage system.</p>
<p class="indent"><strong><em>Oxygen carriers</em></strong> as blood substitutes are an attractive alternative to transfusion, eliminating many of the risks associated with RBC administration.<a id="page515"></a> There are no compounds currently approved for human use, although this is an active field of research. Unfortunately, blood substitutes containing recombinant hemoglobin molecules have been associated with hypertension and renal and liver dysfunction, while substitutes containing perfluorocarbon compounds, which increase the fraction of dissolved oxygen, commonly cause thrombocytopenia. Hopefully, further studies will provide an efficient low-risk alternative blood substitute.<sup><a href="ch024-sec07.xhtml#bib8">8</a></sup></p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">The process of coagulation is complex, involving numerous components and interactive processes. If time permits, the cause for unusual bleeding should be carefully elucidated and therapy precisely targeted. In an emergency, &#x201C;shotgun&#x201D; therapy with fresh frozen plasma or platelets may be necessary.</p>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>