<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/jquery.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
<!--<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-1.10.2.min.js'></script>-->
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-migrate-1.2.1.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery.qtip.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/etext.js'></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec171">III. Anesthetic Management for Gastrointestinal Surgery</h4>
<p class="nonindent">The care of patients undergoing gastrointestinal surgery forms a significant part of anesthesia practice in most hospitals. Many facilities have developed evidence-based protocols as part of an enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) pathway to reduce complications and length of hospital stay in patients undergoing major gastrointestinal procedures.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen440">A. Pharmacology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Opioids decrease lower esophageal sphincter (LES) tone and reduce gastric and bowel motility, often causing ileus and constipation in intensive care <a id="page599"></a>patients sedated with opioids. Relaxation of the LES can allow reflux of gastric contents and increase the risk for aspiration. Opioids&#x2014;particularly morphine&#x2014;cause contraction of the common bile duct sphincter, which can be problematic if intraoperative cholangiograms are taken. Cholinesterase inhibitors and high neuraxial blockade can cause hyperperistaltic activity because of parasympathetic activation and inhibition of the sympathetic system, respectively. This may be detrimental in patients with bowel obstruction.</p>
<p class="indent">Nitrous oxide (N<sub>2</sub>O) will diffuse into bowel, particularly if it is already distended with bowel gas. This can result in bowel distension and increased intraluminal pressure, which can impair abdominal closure and, in extreme situations, cause bowel ischemia. Consequently, N<sub>2</sub>O should be used rarely, if at all, during surgeries involving ischemic bowel.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen441">B. Pulmonary Function</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Patients undergoing upper abdominal surgery are at increased risk for postoperative pulmonary complications, likely related to atelectasis, reduced cough (pain, edema, ileus), and the risk of perioperative aspiration. Intraoperatively, supine or head-down positioning and abdominal retractors can impair diaphragmatic movement and induce atelectasis and hypoxia. Strategies to prevent pulmonary complications include preoperative cessation of smoking and optimization of preexisting pulmonary disease, intraoperative avoidance of long-acting neuromuscular blockers, good postoperative pain control, and nasogastric drainage in selected patients. The evidence in favor of spinal and epidural techniques to reduce postoperative pulmonary complications is suggestive but not conclusive. The impact of laparoscopic surgery on the respiratory system is discussed elsewhere in this book.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen442">C. Mechanical Obstruction and Paralytic Ileus</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Mechanical obstruction of the bowel usually requires surgical management. Patients present with pain, distension, vomiting, and obstipation. Up to 7 to 9&#x00A0;L of fluid may be secreted daily into the gut in an adult (approximately 1&#x00A0;L of saliva, 2&#x00A0;L of gastric juice, 1&#x00A0;L of bile, 2&#x00A0;L of pancreatic juice, and 1&#x00A0;L of succus entericus), and patients can present with severe dehydration and electrolyte abnormalities. An abdominal radiograph may show multiple air-fluid levels in small bowel obstruction. Perioperative considerations for the anesthesiologist include the management of aspiration risk, fluid resuscitation, and postoperative analgesia. Gastric decompression via nasogastric tube insertion prior to intubation is often advised. Nitrous oxide should be avoided due to its propensity to diffuse into airspaces and worsen bowel distension.</p>
<p class="indent">Following major gastrointestinal surgery, postoperative ileus is common, related to physical manipulation of the abdominal viscera. Small bowel motility recovers within a few hours after surgery, gastric peristalsis returns after 24 to 48 hours, and colonic activity returns after 48 hours. Passage of flatus, cramping, and return of appetite signify the return of peristaltic activity. Conventional surgical wisdom was to withhold enteral feeding until the return of these physical signs of peristalsis. However, more recently, studies suggest that early (within 24 hours) enteral feeding is not associated with increased postoperative nausea, vomiting, or other complications and may reduce hospital length of stay. Paralytic ileus can also develop after blunt abdominal trauma, bowel perforation, bilious peritonitis, intra-abdominal sepsis, or in the context of extra-abdominal pathologies like severe pneumonia, trauma, sepsis and myocardial infarction, and electrolyte abnormalities.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen443"><a id="page600"></a>D. Bowel Perforation and Peritonitis</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Perforation of the gastrointestinal tract into the peritoneal cavity leads to peritonitis and sepsis. Potential sources for a perforated viscus include peptic ulcer, appendicular lesion, diverticulitis, and small bowel disease. Treatment usually involves surgical repair. Advanced age, delayed presentation (&#x003E;24 hours), organ failure on presentation, diffuse generalized peritonitis, and fecal contamination of the peritoneum are associated with increased hospital stay and mortality.</p>
<p class="indent">Patients with severe peritonitis are often severely hypovolemic and present with metabolic acidosis and reduced perfusion of tissues. Preoperative and intraoperative restoration of hemodynamics with adequate fluid resuscitation and early institution of appropriate antibiotic therapy are essential. Postoperatively, these patients require admission to an ICU.</p>
<p class="BIBLIOGRAPHYpTitle">References</p>
<ol class="ref"><li id="bib1">Sharma S, Arora L. Anesthesia for the morbidly obese patient. <em>Anesthesiol Clin</em>. 2020;38(1):197-212. PMID: 32008653.</li>
<li id="bib2">Hodgson LE, Murphy PB, Hart N. Respiratory management of the obese patient undergoing surgery. <em>J Thorac Dis</em>. 2015;7(5):943-952. PMID: 26101653.</li>
<li id="bib3">Ortiz VE, Kwo J. Obesity: physiologic changes and implications for preoperative management. <em>BMC Anesthesiol</em>. 2015;15:97. PMID: 26141622.</li>
<li id="bib4">Chau EHL, Lam D, Wong J, et al. Obesity hypoventilation syndrome. A review of epidemiology, pathophysiology, and perioperative considerations. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2012;117:<br/>188-205. PMID: 22614131.</li>
<li id="bib5">Willis S, Bordelon GJ, Rana MV. Perioperative pharmacologic considerations in obesity. <em>Anesthesiol Clin</em>. 2017;35(2):247-257. PMID: 28526146.</li>
<li id="bib6">Practice guidelines for the perioperative management of patients with obstructive sleep apnea: an updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Perioperative Management of patients with obstructive sleep apnea. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2014;120(2):268-286. PMID: 24346178.</li>
<li id="bib7">Skues MA. Perioperative management of the obese ambulatory patient. <em>Curr Opin Anaesthesiol</em>. 2018;31(6):693-699. PMID: 30379735.</li>
<li id="bib8">Giannini EG, Testa R, Savarino V. Liver enzyme alteration: a guide for clinicians. <em>CMAJ (Can Med Assoc J)</em>. 2005;172:367-379. PMID: 15684121.</li>
</ol>
<a id="page601"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp28_1" onclick="openLinkInNewTab('https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_caf/28_Liver_Disease_and_Hemostasis/story.html');">Infographic 28.1 A Closer Look at Liver Disease and Hemostasis  <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<a id="page602"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp28_2" onclick="openLinkInNewTab('https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/28A_Anesthetic_Considerations_for_Obesity/index.html');">Interactive Video Lecture 28a. Anesthetic Considerations for Obesity <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<a id="page603"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp28_3" onclick="openLinkInNewTab('https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/28B_Anesthetic_Considerations_in_Hepatic_Disease_Gastrointestinal_Issues/index.html');">Interactive Video Lecture 28b. Anesthetic Considerations in Hepatic Disease, and Other Gastrointestinal Issues <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>