<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec180">V. Preoperative Evaluation</h4>
<p class="nonindent">All patients undergoing ophthalmologic surgery should receive a thorough perioperative evaluation. Timing for the preanesthesia evaluation is based on the invasiveness of the procedure and the general medical condition of the patient.</p>
<p class="indent">The components of the preanesthesia evaluation are as follows: full patient history, allergies, medications, anesthetic history (personal and familial), and <a id="page616"></a>an anesthesia-focused physical examination. A complete account of all topical and systemic medications is necessary. This includes over-the-counter medications and alternative therapies. Clear instructions should be given to the patient regarding which medications to take and which ones to hold prior to surgery. Special attention should be paid to anticoagulants and antiplatelet medications. Continue warfarin (at least for cataract surgery) due to lack of evidence for a clinically significant increase in the risk of hemorrhage. Dual antiplatelet therapy should be continued in patients with cardiac stents during the perioperative period. Consultation with the patient&#x2019;s cardiologist, primary care physician, and ophthalmologist regarding management of anticoagulants and antiplatelet medications may be necessary. The physical examination must include, at a minimum, general condition and vital signs, airway examination (including range of motion of the cervical spine), and dental, cardiac, and lung examinations.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>