<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec142">II. Blood Compatibility</h4>
<p class="nonindent">RBC compatibility testing consists of typing for ABO and Rh(D), screening the plasma for non-ABO antibodies, and crossmatching prospective RBC units. Group O, A, and B persons have naturally occurring strong plasma anti-A and/or anti-B to the antigen(s) they lack, and RBC units must be ABO compatible to avoid hemolytic transfusion reactions. D-negative persons can easily make anti-D when exposed to D-positive RBCs and should normally receive D-negative RBCs. This is especially important for girls and women of reproductive age to avoid risk of hemolytic disease of the newborn in future D-positive fetuses. One to 2% of all patients and 5% to 20% of multitransfused patients have non-ABO hemolytic alloantibodies to Rh and other blood group antigens. These antibodies must be identified so that RBC units negative for the target antigens can be given to avoid hemolysis. After these &#x201C;type and screen&#x201D; tests, donor RBC units are crossmatched to the patient, either by computer confirmation (electronic crossmatch) or, if significant antibodies are present, by serological crossmatching of plasma versus donor RBCs. Compatibility testing routinely takes 45 to 60 minutes or longer if RBC alloantibodies, warm (IgG), or cold (IgM) autoantibodies are present. If RBCs must be given emergently before testing is completed, uncrossmatched group O RBCs (D-negative for girls and women of reproductive age) are the best choice, after weighing the risk of non-ABO hemolytic RBC antibodies. In an emergency, as a guide to help remember that group O is a &#x201C;universal donor,&#x201D; think of the &#x201C;O&#x201D; in donor.</p>
<a id="page510"></a>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>