<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec179">IV. Anesthetic Implications of Ophthalmic Drugs</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Absorption of topical ophthalmic drugs may be sufficient to cause systemic effects. Additionally, some medications that are administered systemically may have significant ophthalmic effects. Constant communication between the anesthesia team and the surgical staff regarding all medications and dosages administered is required to prevent unintended adverse effects.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Echothiophate (phospholine iodide), which is used in the treatment of refractory glaucoma, results in a reduction of pseudocholinesterase activity, causing a longer duration of action for succinylcholine and ester-type local anesthetics.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen460">A. Anticholinesterase Agents</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Long-acting topical anticholinesterase agents, such as echothiophate are used in the treatment of refractory glaucoma. They result in a reduction of pseudocholinesterase activity that may last several weeks. In their presence, one can expect a longer duration of action for succinylcholine (prolonged apnea) and ester-type local anesthetics; thus, lower dosages of these medications may be required.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen461">B. Cyclopentolate</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Cyclopentolate is used as a mydriatic agent. Concentration-dependent central nervous system (CNS) toxicity occurs with its use. Manifestations of CNS toxicity include dysarthria, disorientation, and psychotic episodes. Seizures have been observed in children. Use should be limited to concentrations below 1%.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen462">C. Epinephrine</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Epinephrine (2%) is useful in the treatment of open-angle glaucoma. However, systemic absorption may result in hypertension, headaches, and cardiac dysrhythmias. Dipivefrin is a prodrug of epinephrine that reduces the production of aqueous humor, increases its outflow, and has fewer side effects than epinephrine.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen463">D. Phenylephrine</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Phenylephrine decreases capillary congestion and causes mydriasis. Systemic absorption may result in hypertension, headaches, tremors, and bradycardia. In patients with coronary artery disease, it could trigger myocardial ischemia. In small children and the elderly, a solution of 2.5% phenylephrine should be used instead of the usual 10%. To minimize absorption, its use should be limited to the time before incision (to avoid absorption in open venous beds).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen464">E. Topical Beta Blockers</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Timolol is a nonselective beta blocker that decreases aqueous humor production. Systemic absorption may cause bradycardia, bronchospasm, congestive heart failure, exacerbation of myasthenia gravis, and postoperative apnea in neonates. Exercise caution when prescribing to patients with preexisting <a id="page615"></a>reactive airway diseases, congestive heart failure (CHF), and conduction abnormalities greater than first-degree heart block.</p>
<p class="indent">Betaxolol is a newer antiglaucoma beta blocker that is more oculoselective than timolol and has minimal systemic effects. Nonetheless, it may potentiate the effects of systemic beta blockers and is contraindicated in patients with sinus bradycardia, first-degree or higher heart block, CHF, and cardiogenic shock.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen465">F. Intraocular Sulfur Hexafluoride</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Sulfur hexafluoride (SF6) is commonly used in retinal detachment repair to replace the volume of vitreous humor lost during surgery. Its low water solubility ensures persistence of the intraocular bubble for several days to weeks.</p>
<p class="indent">Nitrous oxide (N<sub>2</sub>O) is 34 times more soluble in SF6 than nitrogen; thus, it enters the bubble quicker than nitrogen can exit. This &#x201C;entrainment&#x201D; of N<sub>2</sub>O causes expansion of the gas bubble, increasing the IOP and potentially compromising the retinal blood flow, especially in the presence of systemic hypotension. N<sub>2</sub>O should be discontinued 15 minutes prior to injecting SF6 or any other gas. Abrupt discontinuation of N<sub>2</sub>O after injection of SF6 will result in a sharp decrease in the volume of the bubble with a corresponding drop in IOP to below awake levels, possibly jeopardizing the surgical repair. N<sub>2</sub>O must be avoided up to 5&#x00A0;days after injection of air, 10&#x00A0;days after the injection of SF6, and 70&#x00A0;days after injection of perfluorocarbons. A Medic Alert bracelet should be considered to prevent this complication, particularly after use of perfluorocarbons.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen466">G. Systemic Drugs</h5>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>1. Oral Glycerol</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">Oral glycerol is used to lower the IOP during the treatment of acute glaucoma attacks. Its side effects include hyperglycemia, glycosuria, disorientation, and seizures.</p>
<h6 class="h6">2. Mannitol</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Mannitol is used to decrease IOP to enhance surgical exposure (achieve a &#x201C;soft eye&#x201D;) and occasionally to treat glaucoma. Rapid administration of large doses of mannitol has been associated with renal failure, CHF, fluid overload, electrolyte imbalance, hypertension due to rapid increase in intravascular oncotic pressure, hypotension from the subsequent diuresis, and myocardial ischemia. Allergic reactions have been described as well.</p>
<h6 class="h6">3. Acetazolamide</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Acetazolamide, a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, is used to decrease IOP. Because of its renal tubular effects, acetazolamide can result in the loss of sodium bicarbonate and potassium. Metabolic acidosis and cardiac arrhythmias have been described as well. Acetazolamide should not be used in patients with severe liver or renal dysfunction.<sup><a href="ch029-sec14.xhtml#bib16">16</a></sup></p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>