<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec120">I. Airway Anatomy</h4>
<p class="nonindent">The term <strong><em>airway</em></strong> refers to the upper airway&#x2014;consisting of the nasal and oral cavities, pharynx, larynx, trachea, and principal bronchi. The laryngeal skeleton houses and protects the vocal folds, which extend in an anterior-posterior plane from the thyroid cartilage to the arytenoid cartilages. The cricothyroid membrane is an important, externally identifiable structure. In an adult, it typically is identified 1 to 1.5 fingerbreadths below the laryngeal prominence (thyroid notch) (<strong><a href="ch020-sec02.xhtml#ff20-1">Figure 20.1</a></strong>).</p>
<p class="indent">The signet ring&#x2013;shaped cricoid cartilage is located at the base of the larynx, suspended by the underside of the cricothyroid ligament. Inferiorly, the trachea measures approximately 15&#x00A0;cm and ends at the carina where it bifurcates into the principal bronchi. Aspirated materials, as well as a deeply inserted <strong><em>endotracheal tube (ETT)</em></strong>, tend to gain entry into the right principal bronchus due to it&#x2019;s less acute angle of divergence from the midline.</p>
<p class="video"><video data-id="S28LqVxY" controls="controls" class="jwp-video" crossorigin="anonymous" style="width:100%; height:auto; width:320px; height:240px;">Browser issues</video></p>
<p class="video1" id="vid20-1"><strong>VIDEO 20.1</strong></p>
<p class="video2"><strong>Endobronchial Intubation</strong></p>
<p class="indent">There are three clinically important neural innervations of the upper airway. The glossopharyngeal nerve (cranial nerve IX) supplies sensory innervation to the base of the tongue, rostral surface of the epiglottis, and pharynx. The superior laryngeal nerve (a branch of cranial nerve X, the vagus nerve) supplies sensation from the underside of the epiglottis to the surface of the vocal cords and motor innervation to the cricothyroid muscle. The recurrent laryngeal nerve, also a branch of the vagus nerve, supplies motor innervation to the remaining muscles of the larynx and sensation to the mucosal surface of the larynx and trachea (<strong><a href="ch020-sec03.xhtml#tt20-1">Table 20.1</a></strong>; <strong><a href="ch020-sec03.xhtml#ff20-2">Figure 20.2</a></strong>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>