<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/jquery.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
<!--<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-1.10.2.min.js'></script>-->
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-migrate-1.2.1.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery.qtip.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/etext.js'></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec151">IV. Conclusion</h4>
<p class="nonindent">The same standards for preoperative evaluation and preparation, intraoperative monitoring, and postoperative care must be maintained regardless of the patient, setting, or type of anesthetic to be administered. Policies and procedures should be in place to ensure a minimum standard of care across all anesthetizing locations. All persons providing sedation must have knowledge of the pharmacologic properties of sedatives and analgesic drugs, be able to recognize and manage their adverse side effects, and be capable of performing the emergency procedures that may be needed to rescue a patient from a deeper than intended level of sedation. The duration of action of medications used in any individual anesthetic should be based on the patient&#x2019;s condition and the nature of the planned procedure. Follow-up with patients and analysis of outcomes will allow our specialty to continually increase patient safety and satisfaction in all settings where anesthesia is administered.</p>
<p class="BIBLIOGRAPHYpTitle">References</p>
<ol class="ref"><li id="bib1"><em>Surgeries in Hospital-Based Ambulatory Surgery and Hospital Inpatient Settings</em> [Internet]. 2014. Accessed October 4, 2020. <a href="https://hcup-us.ahrq.gov/reports/statbriefs/sb223-Ambulatory-Inpatient-Surgeries-2014.jsp">https://hcup-us.ahrq.gov/reports/statbriefs/sb223-Ambulatory-Inpatient-Surgeries-2014.jsp</a></li>
<li id="bib2">Hall MJ, Schwartzman A, Zhang J, et al. Ambulatory surgery data from hospitals and ambulatory surgery centers: United States, 2010. <em>Natl Health Stat Report</em>. 2017;(102):1-15.</li>
<li id="bib3">American Society of Anesthesiologists. <em>Position on Monitored Anesthesia Care</em>. Accessed July 20, 2020. 2008. <a href="http://www.asahq.org">www.asahq.org</a></li>
<li id="bib4">American Society of Anesthesiologists. <em>Distinguishing Monitored Anesthesia Care (&#x201C;MAC&#x201D;) From Moderate Sedation/analgesia (Conscious Sedation</em>. 2013. Accessed July 20, 2020. <a href="http://www.asahq.org">www.asahq.org</a></li>
<li id="bib5">Jalota L, Kalira V, George E, et al. Prevention of pain on injection of propofol: systematic review and meta-analysis. <em>Br Med J</em>. 2011;342:d1110. PMID: 21406529.</li>
<li id="bib6">Mazanikov M, Udd M, Kyl&#x00E4;np&#x00E4;&#x00E4; L, et al. Patient-controlled sedation for ERCP: a randomized double-blind comparison of alfentanil and remifentanil. <em>Endoscopy</em>. 2012;44(5):487-492. PMID: 22450724.</li>
<li id="bib7">American Society of Anesthesiologists. <em>Standards for Basic Anesthetic Monitoring</em>. 2011. Accessed July 20, 2020. <a href="http://www.asahq.org">www.asahq.org</a></li>
<li id="bib8">American Society of Anesthesiologists. <em>Continuum of Depth of Sedation, Definition of General Anesthesia and Levels of Sedation/Analgesia</em>. 2009. Accessed July 20, 2020. <a href="http://www.asahq.org">www.asahq.org</a></li>
<li id="bib9"><a id="page541"></a>American Society of Anesthesiologists Committee. Practice guidelines for preoperative fasting and the use of pharmacologic agents to reduce the risk of pulmonary aspiration: application to healthy patients undergoing elective procedures. An updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Committee on Standards and Practice Parameters. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2011;114:495-511.</li>
<li id="bib10">De Oliveira GS, Ahmad S, Fitzgerald PC, et al. Dose ranging study on the effect of preoperative dexamethasone on postoperative quality of recovery and opioid consumption after ambulatory gynaecological surgery. <em>Br J Anaesth</em>. 2011;107(3):362-371. PMID: 21669954.</li>
<li id="bib11">Murphy GS, Szokol JW, Avram MJ, et al. The effect of single low-dose dexamethasone on blood glucose concentrations in the perioperative period: a randomized, placebo-controlled investigation in gynecologic surgical patients. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2014;118(6):1204-1212. PMID: 24299928.</li>
<li id="bib12">Apfelbaum JL, Walawander CA, Grasela TH, et al. Eliminating intensive postoperative care in same-day surgery patients using short-acting anesthetics. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2002;97(1):66-74. PMID: 12131105.</li>
<li id="bib13">Aldrete JA, Kroulik D. A postanesthetic recovery score. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 1970;49(6):924-934. PMID: 5534693.</li>
<li id="bib14">Chung F, Chan VW, Ong D. A post-anesthetic discharge scoring system for home readiness after ambulatory surgery. <em>J Clin Anesth</em>. 1995;7(6):500-506. PMID: 8534468.</li>
<li id="bib15">Kurrek MM, Twersky RS. Office-based anesthesia: how to start an office-based practice. <em>Anesthesiol Clin</em>. 2010;28(2):353-367. PMID: 20488399.</li>
<li id="bib16"><em>Guidelines for Office-Based Anesthesia</em> [Internet]. Accessed July 30, 2020. <a href="https://www.asahq.org/standards-and-guidelines/guidelines-for-office-based-anesthesia">https://www.asahq.org/standards-and-guidelines/guidelines-for-office-based-anesthesia</a></li>
<li id="bib17">Ahmad S Office based&#x2014;is my anesthetic care any different? Assessment and management. <em>Anesthesiol Clin</em>. 2010;28(2):369-384. PMID: 20488400.</li></ol>
<a id="page542"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp25_1" onclick="openLinkInNewTab('https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_caf/25_PONV/story.html');">Infographic 25.1 A Closer Look at Postoperative Nausea and Vomiting  <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<div class="link-me" id="grp25_2" onclick="openLinkInNewTab('https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/25_Ambulatory_Anesthesia_Monitored_Anesthesia_Care_Office_Based_Anesthesia/index.html');">Interactive Video Lecture 25. Ambulatory Anesthesia, Monitored Anesthesia Care, and Office-Based Anesthesia <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>