<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec152">I. Preoperative Assessment</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Orthopedic spine and extremity surgeries are generally classified as intermediate risk, although major spine surgery or more limited procedures in patients with preexisting medical conditions (eg, hip arthroplasty in the elderly) can significantly increase perioperative risk. The purpose of the preoperative assessment includes the identification and optimization of modifiable risk factors, explanation of the risks, and formulating the best possible anesthetic plan for the patient. In addition to the standard preoperative assessment (see <a href="ch016.xhtml">Chapter 16</a>), focused orthopedic evaluation should include the following:</p>
<ul class="u_bullb"><li><span>Appraisal of the urgency of the planned procedure, to appropriately expedite further testing and optimization (eg, risk of progression of secondary injury, infection risk of open fractures, thromboembolic complications of immobilization while awaiting surgery).</span></li>
<li><span>Airway and cervical spine assessment (eg, rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis, and ankylosing spondylitis could result in limited neck motion, atlantoaxial instability, or limited mouth opening due to the involvement of the temporomandibular joint).</span></li>
<li><span>Assessment of respiratory system (eg, scoliosis-induced restrictive chest defects, impaired diaphragm function due to spinal cord injury).</span></li>
<li><span>Assessment of cardiovascular system. Fitness level is the deciding criterion for the need for further assessment. Spine and orthopedic surgery patients may have limited exercise tolerance due to other reasons (commonly, pain) and therefore complicate this assessment.</span></li>
<li><span>Assessment of neurologic status, including existing neurologic deficiencies and active range of motion of extremities.</span></li>
<li><span>Assessment of pain and psychological burden in order to establish realistic postoperative expectations for pain and function.</span></li>
<li><span>Review of past medical, surgical, and anesthetic history, allergies, and current medications with special attention to chronic opioid use and disease-modifying drugs such as steroids, methotrexate, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.</span></li>
<li><span>Hematologic profile and anticoagulant or antiplatelet drug use. Management of anemia and modification or discontinuation of the drugs affecting coagulation will likely be required.</span></li>
<li><span><a id="page546"></a>Assessment of frailty via standardized frailty instruments, to plan perioperative interventions to mitigate risks of delirium, major deconditioning, and postoperative morbidity (eg, exercise prehabilitation, nutritional optimization, discharge support planning).<sup><a href="ch026-sec09.xhtml#bib1">1</a></sup></span></li>
<li><span>Planning for the postoperative care transition, intensity of care, pain management approaches including multimodal and regional analgesia, and eventual discharge destination.</span></li></ul>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>