<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec159">VIII. Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Anesthetic management of pediatric orthopedic patients encompasses general pediatric anesthesia considerations (see <a href="ch033.xhtml">Chapter 33</a>) but in the specific orthopedic context of traumatic injury, cancer, and unique disease states such as congenital disorders. Fractures, scoliosis, joint abnormalities, clubfoot, and syndactyly can require surgical repair in childhood and demand special<a id="page562"></a> anesthetic considerations. Positioning can be challenging due to muscle contractures (cerebral palsy) and bone abnormalities (osteogenesis imperfecta). This is also true in other conditions associated with cervical spine instability (Down syndrome), limited neck range of motion (achondroplasia), and cardiac defects (Marfan syndrome). Children with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, Duchenne muscular dystrophy, and myotonic dystrophy are prone to succinylcholine-induced hyperkalemia, rhabdomyolysis, and malignant hyperthermia. In addition, pediatric patients present unique challenges to using regional anesthesia, particularly that the accepted standard of care is to perform blocks under general anesthesia or deep sedation.<sup><a href="ch026-sec09.xhtml#bib16">16</a></sup> The same peripheral nerve blocks used in adults with ultrasound guidance can generally be used in children, with appropriate weight-based local anesthetic dose adjustments.<sup><a href="ch026-sec09.xhtml#bib17">17</a></sup></p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>