<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec149">II. Ambulatory Anesthesia</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen386">A. Patient and Procedure Selection</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Ambulatory anesthesia encompasses anesthesia provided in a hospital-based ambulatory surgery unit, freestanding ambulatory surgery center, or physician&#x2019;s office. One advantage of an outpatient site is that costs are generally much lower than in the hospital. Turnaround time is also frequently improved in an ambulatory center, which may be the result of more streamlined processes or financial incentives.</p>
<p class="indent">A commonly held misconception is that ambulatory surgery is only appropriate for healthy, ASA physical status (PS) I and II patients. However, ASA PS III and IV patients may be cared for successfully in ambulatory centers provided their comorbidities are stable. Uncomplicated obesity is not necessarily a risk factor for poor outcomes. However, obese patients are more likely to have OSA, which is associated with postoperative respiratory complications. The ASA has published specific guidelines pertaining to the perioperative management of ambulatory surgery patients with OSA. Regardless of age and comorbidities, all patients who undergo ambulatory surgery should have a responsible adult escort them home and assist with postoperative care for the first 24 hours, when needed.</p>
<p class="indent">Many institutions and some states have a lower age cutoff for ambulatory surgery. For example, centers may require that infants born at term be at least 1&#x00A0;month of age to be eligible for outpatient surgery. Preterm infants are often required to be older (50-60&#x00A0;weeks postconceptual age) because they have a higher risk of postoperative apnea. Similarly, advanced age is not a contraindication to surgery in an ambulatory center; however, medications are more slowly metabolized in the elderly, and anesthetic plans should be modified accordingly.</p>
<p class="indent">Procedure selection is also important. Procedures appropriate for the ambulatory setting should have a low risk of postoperative complications and require minimal postoperative care. Ideally, procedures should be of short<a id="page533"></a> duration (&#x003C;2 hours). It is generally best to perform longer procedures or procedures on higher risk patients early in the day to allow more time for postoperative monitoring.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen387">B. Preoperative Evaluation</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Preoperative screening is an important tool to reduce adverse outcomes on the day of surgery. This involves a complete medical history, including surgeries, past anesthetics, medications, and allergies as well as a focused physical examination (at minimum, heart, lungs, and airway). This is also the appropriate occasion to review preoperative fasting and medication instructions, set realistic expectations about the anesthetic and postoperative pain, and confirm postoperative plans for transportation by a responsible adult.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Upper Respiratory Tract Infection</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Whether to proceed with anesthesia in a patient with an upper respiratory infection (URI) requires consideration of several factors. If the URI is mild and without constitutional symptoms, surgery may usually proceed, particularly if intubation of the trachea is not expected. If the URI is severe and wheezing or constitutional symptoms are present or if intubation is required, the surgery should probably be postponed for 4 to 6&#x00A0;weeks. The recommendations for children are somewhat different, mainly because children have URIs more frequently than adults and delaying surgery may be infeasible. Most anesthesiologists would proceed with surgery if the child appears well, is afebrile, and is breathing and eating normally.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Restriction of Food and Liquids Prior to Ambulatory Surgery</h6>
<p class="nonindent">The ASA has established practice guidelines for preoperative fasting, which are listed in <strong><a href="#tt25-3">Table 25.3</a></strong>.<sup><a href="ch025-sec04.xhtml#bib9">9</a></sup> The guidelines are the same regardless of whether the patient is being treated in a hospital or ambulatory setting. These guidelines permit a light meal up to 6 hours prior to elective surgery (8 hours for a fatty meal) and clear liquids such as black coffee or tea without cream or other additives up to 2 hours prior to surgery. In infants, breast milk is permitted up to 4 hours prior to surgery and infant formula up to 6 hours prior to surgery. To the extent possible, fasting duration should be minimized, especially in young children.</p>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt25-3"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;25.3</span> ASA Fasting Guidelines for Elective Surgery</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:33%;"></col>
<col style="width:33%;"></col>
<col style="width:34%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Substance</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Fasting Time</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Examples</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Clear liquids</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">2 h</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Water, transparent juice, coffee/tea without additives</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Breast milk</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">4 h</p></td>
<td class="td3">&#x00A0;</td></tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Infant formula</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">6 h</p></td>
<td class="td2">&#x00A0;</td></tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Light meal</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">6 h</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Dry toast</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Fatty meal</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">8 h</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Fried food, butter, cream</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">ASA, American Society of Anesthesiologists.</p>
<p class="u_tfoot">From American Society of Anesthesiologists Committee. Practice guidelines for preoperative fasting and the use of pharmacologic agents to reduce the risk of pulmonary aspiration: application to healthy patients undergoing elective procedures. An updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Committee on Standards and Practice Parameters. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2011;114:495-511.</p>
</div>
<a id="page534"></a>
<h6 class="h6">Anxiety Reduction</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Probably the most effective and undervalued way to reduce patient anxiety is through a conversation with an anesthesia provider prior to surgery. For children, parental presence during induction may be of benefit. Involvement of a child life specialist and distraction techniques may also be helpful. Oral and intravenous anxiolytic medications may also be used.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen388">C. Managing the Anesthetic: Premedication</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Premedication is not necessarily different in the ambulatory setting, but careful selection of agent and dose is important to facilitate timely discharge.</p>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>Benzodiazepines</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">Midazolam is the most commonly used benzodiazepine for the purpose of anxiolysis. Due to a synergistic effect with other anesthetic agents, it may delay emergence or discharge following very short procedures, and therefore, it is important to assess whether the patient requires or desires preoperative sedation. In addition to its anxiolytic properties, midazolam also has the benefit of inducing amnesia. These effects on memory are independent of the sedative effects, and a patient may appear completely awake yet have no recollection of events afterward.</p>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>Opioids and Nonsteroidal Analgesics</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">In addition to their analgesic effects, opioids are often administered as part of preprocedural sedation or to decrease the hemodynamic response to sympathetic stimulation (eg, laryngoscopy, intubation, or surgical incision). A multimodal approach to pain control is especially important in the ambulatory setting. The addition of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as ketorolac and ibuprofen, and acetaminophen help modulate pain through alternative pathways. These drugs effectively decrease narcotic requirements, thereby reducing the adverse side effects related to opioid administration.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen389">D. Intraoperative Management: Choice of Anesthetic Method</h5>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>Anesthetic Options</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">The anesthetic choices for ambulatory surgery include general anesthesia, regional or neuraxial anesthesia, MAC, and local anesthesia. Regional and local anesthetic techniques have the potential benefit of requiring minimal sedation. In some situations, the type of surgery dictates the choice of anesthetic; in most situations, a discussion between patient, surgeon, and anesthesiologist is useful to determine the most appropriate choice. Recovery time is an important element in determining the anesthetic technique.</p>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>Regional Techniques</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">The regional anesthetic techniques used in ambulatory surgery include neuraxial anesthesia (spinal or epidural), peripheral nerve blocks (PNBs), intravenous regional anesthesia (such as Bier block), and local anesthetic infiltration, or field and digital blocks performed by the surgeon. The use of local anesthetics with long-acting analgesic effects such as bupivacaine can be especially useful to help with postoperative pain control.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Spinal Anesthesia</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Spinal anesthesia is an appropriate choice for surgery on the lower extremities, pelvis, or lower abdomen. The use of a short-acting local anesthetic will result <a id="page535"></a>in rapid recovery of motor and sensory function and shortens the time to discharge. Intrathecal opioids are not often administered when spinal anesthesia is performed for ambulatory surgery. Postdural puncture headache is not a common complication when smaller gauge pencil-point noncutting needles are used.</p>
<p class="video"><video data-id="ZnUeGDJ6" controls="controls" class="jwp-video" crossorigin="anonymous" style="width:100%; height:auto; width:320px; height:240px;">Browser issues</video></p>
<p class="video1" id="vid25-1"><strong>VIDEO 25.1</strong></p>
<p class="video2"><strong>Hypotension After Spinal Anesthesia</strong></p>
<h6 class="h6">Epidural and Caudal Anesthesia</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Epidural anesthesia involves the introduction of a catheter into the epidural space, which may be placed preoperatively and injected with local anesthetic just prior to surgery. Doses of local anesthetic can be repeated intermittently, or the catheter can be connected to an infusion for longer surgeries. Epidural anesthesia is rarely used in adult ambulatory procedures.</p>
<p class="indent">Caudal anesthesia is a form of epidural anesthesia often performed in children for urologic surgeries and those in the lower abdomen and involves local anesthetic injection into the caudal canal. It is frequently used in conjunction with general anesthesia since children cannot generally tolerate needle insertion. Caudal anesthesia allows surgery to be performed with minimal perioperative opioids, and postoperative analgesia may last for several hours based on the choice of medication and dose administered. Caudal anesthesia is a great option for pediatric patients who are at high risk for perioperative apnea.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Peripheral Nerve Blocks</h6>
<p class="nonindent">The use of peripheral nerve blocks (PNBs) for certain painful procedures such as shoulder surgery has allowed these procedures to be performed in the ambulatory setting. PNBs are associated with reduced pain, nausea, and vomiting and increased patient satisfaction. If postoperative pain is expected to be severe, a peripheral nerve catheter that provides a slow release of local anesthetic can be placed via ultrasound guidance. Patients can go home with the catheters in place and are usually instructed to remove them within 48 to 72 hours. It is important for the patient to receive detailed postoperative instructions. A more in-depth discussion of regional anesthesia can be found in <a href="ch021.xhtml">Chapter 21</a>.</p>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>Sedation and Analgesia</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">Intravenous sedation is a common adjunct to local anesthetic techniques. Analgesic agents decrease pain during initial injection of local anesthetic and alleviate discomfort from positioning on an operating table for a prolonged period. Additionally, their amnestic properties ensure that most patients have little recollection of intraoperative events.</p>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>General Anesthesia</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">General anesthesia is commonly performed in the ambulatory setting. Appropriate selection of anesthetic agents is necessary to facilitate rapid awakening and short recovery, while avoiding adverse side effects. The most common agents used for maintenance of general anesthesia are propofol and sevoflurane. Nitrous oxide, while more rapid in recovery than sevoflurane, may be associated with a higher risk of postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) when used for long periods of time. It is also contraindicated in patients undergoing middle ear surgery or retinal surgeries involving the creation of an intraocular gas bubble. Nitrous oxide should not be used in<a id="page536"></a> pregnant patients due to its effect on vitamin B12 and folate metabolism. Furthermore, while it is not considered flammable, nitrous oxide does support combustion and therefore should not be used in head and neck surgeries in which electrocautery will be used. Although a short-acting neuromuscular blocking agent is often appropriate for intubation, continuous neuromuscular blockade is often not necessary for ambulatory surgeries.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen390">E. Postanesthesia Care</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Many potential postoperative adverse events or complications can be anticipated and prevented. Patient selection plays a major role in planning a successful ambulatory surgical experience. The careful selection and titration of anesthetic agents have a significant impact on recovery. Common causes of delayed recovery are pain, nausea, and sedation due to residual anesthetic effects. Early identification and management are paramount. A more thorough discussion of the postoperative recovery can be found in <a href="ch040.xhtml">Chapter 40</a>.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Nausea and Vomiting</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) is a significant cause of delayed discharge and in rare cases may require admission to the hospital. In addition, PONV has a negative impact on patient satisfaction and quality of recovery. Factors predictive of PONV include female gender, history of PONV or motion sickness, nonsmoking, and certain types of surgery such as head and neck, ophthalmic, breast, and laparoscopy. The risk factors have an additive effect; the greater the number of risk factors present, the greater the risk of PONV. Unfortunately, many anesthetic agents contribute to PONV. Volatile anesthetics, nitrous oxide, and opioids all have emetogenic properties. The most commonly used antiemetics are selective serotonin receptor antagonists such as ondansetron. Other classes of drugs used to treat PONV are the dopamine antagonist butyrophenones (droperidol) and phenothiazines (prochlorperazine); antihistamines (dimenhydrinate); and anticholinergics (scopolamine). The glucocorticoid dexamethasone is also commonly used for PONV prevention and treatment and has been shown to improve quality of recovery. It has no appreciable impact on wound healing and little effect on glucose regulation in healthy subjects.<sup><a href="ch025-sec04.xhtml#bib10">10</a>,<a href="ch025-sec04.xhtml#bib11">11</a></sup> The most effective method to manage PONV is to identify patients at greatest risk and employ a combination of preventive strategies and avoidance of exposure to agents known to contribute to PONV. Total intravenous anesthesia with propofol is often used in patients with a history of severe PONV, as propofol has intrinsic antiemetic properties.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Patient risk factors for PONV include female gender, younger age, and a history of motion sickness or previous PONV.</p>
</div>
<h6 class="h6">Pain</h6>
<p class="nonindent">A multimodal approach to analgesic management is advised. The multimodal approach involves the concomitant use of analgesic agents with different mechanisms of action and has an opioid-sparing effect. The most commonly used adjuncts include ketorolac, celecoxib, pregabalin, ibuprofen, and acetaminophen.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Reversal of Drug Effect</h6>
<p class="nonindent">In the recovery room, it may occasionally become necessary to administer agents such as naloxone or flumazenil to reverse the respiratory depressant effects of opioids or benzodiazepines, respectively. Caution is advised when using these antagonists since they may have serious cardiovascular or central<a id="page537"></a> nervous system effects. When reversal agents are administered, discharge should be delayed to allow time to monitor the patient for the development of resedation.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Patient Discharge</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Postanesthesia care is typically divided into two phases. In Phase I, the emphasis is on ensuring that the patient has recovered from the effects of anesthesia and vital signs are near baseline. In Phase II, the focus is on preparing the patient for hospital discharge, including education on postoperative care. Most patients who receive MAC are ready for Phase II recovery immediately at the end of surgery. In contrast, most patients who receive general anesthesia require a period of time in Phase I recovery. However, with the use of preemptive analgesia and short-acting anesthetics, some patients who receive general anesthesia may bypass Phase I recovery; this is called &#x201C;fast-tracking.&#x201D; One recent study demonstrated significantly shortened recovery duration by eliminating Phase I recovery after general anesthesia (based on standardized criteria), without any change in patient outcome.<sup><a href="ch025-sec04.xhtml#bib12">12</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Several scoring systems have been developed to help determine a patient&#x2019;s readiness for discharge; they have been modified over time to reflect changes in anesthesia techniques and patient management. The original Aldrete score included an evaluation of activity; respiration; circulation; consciousness; and color.<sup><a href="ch025-sec04.xhtml#bib13">13</a></sup> The Postanesthetic Discharge Scoring System (PADSS) was initially based on vital signs; ambulation and mental status; pain and nausea/vomiting; surgical bleeding; and fluid input/output. Ability to void and to tolerate oral intake are no longer required for discharge in most institutions. A contemporary version of the PADSS includes these five categories: vital signs; activity; nausea and vomiting; pain; and surgical bleeding. Discharge home typically requires a PADSS score &#x2265;9 (<strong><a href="ch025-sec03.xhtml#tt25-4">Table 25.4</a></strong>).<sup><a href="ch025-sec04.xhtml#bib14">14</a></sup> Additional discharge criteria for the patient who receives neuraxial anesthesia should include the return of motor and sensory function and the ability to ambulate independently.</p>
<p class="indent">Discharge instructions should be written and explained to the patient and the patient should acknowledge an understanding of these instructions. Patients should be advised not to drive or make any critical decisions for the remainder of the day. The instructions should always include a plan for a contact person or emergency facility should a postoperative issue arise. The patient needs to be discharged home with a responsible adult escort. Most ambulatory facilities conduct a follow-up call the day after surgery to assess the patient&#x2019;s condition.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>