<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec188">V. <a id="page631"></a>Cerebral Perfusion</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen480">A. Processed EEG Monitoring</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Processed EEG monitoring is a useful, practical, and increasingly popular technology in the operating room that utilizes proprietary algorithms and methodologies to produce, among other parameters, a unitless index value (based on the raw EEG signal) which reflects the depth of anesthesia. Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) agonists are associated with various changes in the raw EEG pattern, in a typically reliable and dose-dependent fashion, and processed EEG monitors take advantage of these patterns to give an indication of the level of anesthetic depth. Advantages of using a processed EEG monitor include a tailored approach to anesthetic delivery which may produce a more rapid emergence with fewer side effects (ie, may decrease the overall amount of anesthetic administered) and potentially a decrease in the possibility of recall or &#x201C;awareness&#x201D; under general anesthesia. Some studies also demonstrated the potential for a decrease in the incidence of postoperative delirium and postoperative cognitive dysfunction (POCD) when using processed EEG. Importantly, the index value generated reflects the EEG activity of the frontal cortices only, over which the monitor lies, and is subject to regional cerebral blood flow and neuronal activity, as well as to contamination from electromyographic (EMG) activity from the overlying scalp.<sup><a href="ch030-sec10.xhtml#bib3">3</a></sup></p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen481">B. Transcranial Doppler Ultrasonography</h5>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><em>Transcranial Doppler ultrasonography (TCD)</em></strong> is a tool used in neurosurgery and neurocritical care by which an ultrasound probe is placed over a &#x201C;window&#x201D; (usually the temporal bone) to measure flow velocities of major cerebral vessels (usually the middle cerebral artery). Blood flow velocity is recorded by the ultrasound probe, which emits a high-pitched sound wave. That sound wave bounces off red blood cells and returns to the probe. The speed of the blood in relation to the probe causes a phase shift, with a higher or lower frequency directly correlated to a higher or lower velocity, respectively. Changes in these flow velocities (higher velocities) can indicate narrowing, emboli, or vasospasm of these vessels. Notably, TCD is unable to determine actual CBF; rather, it is primarily a technique for measuring relative changes in CBF over time.<sup><a href="ch030-sec10.xhtml#bib4">4</a></sup></p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Transcranial Doppler ultrasonography can noninvasively assess changes in cerebral blood flow.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen482">C. ICP Monitoring</h5>
<p class="nonindent">ICP monitoring is a useful tool for patients suffering from any cause of dangerously elevated ICP (eg, brain trauma, bleeding, mass). Normal ICP is 5 to 15&#x00A0;mm Hg, and monitoring or treatment is generally initiated when ICP is &#x003E;20&#x00A0;mm Hg. Waveforms of ICP can be transduced (A, B, and C waves) and may be useful diagnostically over time. ICP monitoring can be accomplished using a variety of devices, all of which currently are invasive. The most commonly used device is an <strong><em>external ventricular drain</em></strong>, which measures ICP by way of a transducer connected via tubing to the ventricle. It is also capable of removing CSF to relieve ICP. Other methods of monitoring ICP include the use of a <strong><em>subdural screw</em></strong> (usually performed urgently) placed through the skull and dura mater, an epidural sensor placed between the skull and the dura mater, or a tissue sensor placed directly in the brain parenchyma. These methods are incapable of diverting CSF.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen483">D. Cerebral Oxygenation and Metabolism Monitors</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Other devices used to monitor the homeostasis of the brain, including its oxygenation and metabolism, are available (often experimental) but may not be commonly used in the clinical setting. Jugular bulb venous oximetry is the <a id="page632"></a>most common of these techniques, which involves a fiberoptic catheter placed in a retrograde fashion into the jugular vein. This catheter is capable of measuring the mixed cerebral venous oxygen tension, which is indicative of the brain&#x2019;s oxygen consumption or extraction. Other monitors used to measure <strong><em>cerebral metabolism</em></strong> include microdialysis catheters, which are multiparameter catheters that can detect focal brain tissue oxygen tension, glucose, pyruvate, lactate, glutamate, and glycerol levels by way of obtaining local perfusate from the brain. These catheters are becoming more popular in neurocritical care units but remain primarily research tools.<sup><a href="ch030-sec10.xhtml#bib5">5</a></sup> Lastly, cerebral oximetry has become more prevalent in the clinical setting recently, which involves a noninvasive measurement of regional cerebral blood oxygenation over the frontal cortices bilaterally. Oxygenation is given as a percentage, reflecting the contribution of both arterial (25%) and venous (75%) blood.<sup><a href="ch030-sec10.xhtml#bib6">6</a></sup></p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>