<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec222">I. Preoperative Assessment</h4>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><em>Respiratory</em></strong> and <strong><em>cardiac complications</em></strong> are the major cause of perioperative morbidity and mortality in the thoracic surgical population. Thus, the preoperative evaluation of these patients focuses on an assessment of respiratory function and the cardiopulmonary interaction. All pulmonary resection patients should have preoperative spirometry to determine postoperative preservation of respiratory function, which has been shown to be proportional to the remaining number of lung subsegments (right upper, middle, and lower lobes&#x00A0;=&#x00A0;6, 4, and 12 subsegments, respectively; left upper and lower lobes&#x00A0;=&#x00A0;10 subsegments each, for a total of 42 subsegments). The principles discussed in the sections that follow also apply to thoracic surgical patients who are not having lung resections.<sup><a href="ch035-sec04.xhtml#bib1">1</a>,<a href="ch035-sec04.xhtml#bib2">2</a></sup></p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen613">A. Lung Mechanical Function</h5>
<p class="nonindent">A valid single test for postthoracotomy respiratory complications is the <strong><em>predicted postoperative (ppo) forced expiratory volume</em></strong> in 1 second (ppoFEV<sub>1</sub>%), which is calculated as:</p>
<p class="center">ppoFEV<sub>1</sub>% = prcoperative FEV<sub>1</sub>% &#x00D7; (1 &#x2212; fraction lung issue removed).</p>
<p class="nonindent">For example, a patient with a preoperative FEV<sub>1</sub> of 60% having a right upper lobectomy (6 of 42 lung subsegments) would be expected to have a ppoFEV<sub>1</sub>%&#x00A0;=&#x00A0;60%&#x00A0;&#x00D7;&#x00A0;(1 &#x2212; [6/42])&#x00A0;=&#x00A0;51%. Patients with a ppoFEV<sub>1</sub> &#x003E;40% are at low risk for postresection respiratory complications, &#x003C;40% at moderate risk, and &#x003C;30% are at high risk.<sup><a href="ch035-sec04.xhtml#bib1">1</a>,<a href="ch035-sec04.xhtml#bib2">2</a></sup></p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Patients with a predicted postoperative FEV<sub>1</sub> of &#x003E;40% are at low risk for postoperative respiratory complications.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen614">B. Lung Parenchymal Function</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The most useful test of gas exchange is the <strong><em>diffusing capacity</em></strong> of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO). The preoperative DLCO can be used to calculate a ppo value using the same calculation as for the FEV<sub>1</sub>, with similar risk categories: increased risk &#x003C;40% and high risk &#x003C;30%.<sup><a href="ch035-sec04.xhtml#bib1">1</a>-<a href="ch035-sec04.xhtml#bib3">3</a></sup></p>
<a id="page750"></a>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt35-1"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;35.1</span> Summary of Important Values in the Preoperative Respiratory Assessment</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:20%;"></col>
<col style="width:35%;"></col>
<col style="width:45%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Parameter</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Value</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Risk of Respiratory Complications</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">ppoFEV<sub>1</sub>%</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">&#x003E;40%</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Low</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">&#x00A0;</td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">&#x003C;40%</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Moderate</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">&#x00A0;</td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">&#x003C;30%</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">High</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">ppoDLCO</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">&#x003C;40%</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Increased</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3">&#x00A0;</td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">&#x003C;30%</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Very high</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">O<sub>2</sub>max</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">&#x2264;15&#x00A0;mL/kg/min</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Increased</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">&#x00A0;</td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">&#x2264;10&#x00A0;mL/kg/min</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Very high</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">DLCO, diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide; O<sub>2</sub>max, maximal oxygen consumption; ppoFEV<sub>1</sub>, predicted postoperative forced expiratory volume in 1 second.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen615">C. Cardiopulmonary Interaction</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The most important assessment of respiratory function is an assessment of the <strong><em>cardiopulmonary reserve</em></strong>, and the maximal oxygen consumption (O<sub>2</sub>max) is the most useful predictor of outcome. The risk of morbidity and mortality is increased if the preoperative O<sub>2</sub>max is &#x2264;15&#x00A0;mL/kg/min and very high if it is &#x2264;10&#x00A0;mL/kg/min. In ambulatory patients, the O<sub>2</sub>max can be estimated from the distance in meters that a patient can walk in 6 minutes (6-minute walk test [6MWT]) divided by 30 (ie, 6MWT of 450&#x00A0;m:estimated O<sub>2</sub>max&#x00A0;=&#x00A0;450/30&#x00A0;=&#x00A0;15&#x00A0;mL/kg/min). The ability to climb five flights of stairs correlates with a O<sub>2</sub>max &#x003E; 20&#x00A0;mL/kg/min and two flights corresponds to a O<sub>2</sub>max of 12&#x00A0;mL/kg/min<sup><a href="ch035-sec04.xhtml#bib1">1</a>-<a href="ch035-sec04.xhtml#bib3">3</a></sup> (<strong><a href="#tt35-1">Table 35.1</a></strong>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen616">D. Cardiac Investigations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Patients undergoing thoracic surgery are at risk for cardiac complications, such as myocardial infarction and arrhythmias. Patients should be assessed with the most recent American College of Cardiology and the American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) guidelines for the preoperative assessment of cardiac patients undergoing noncardiac surgery. These guidelines incorporate information based on active cardiac conditions, perioperative cardiac risk factors (<strong><a href="#tt35-2">Table 35.2</a></strong>), and functional capacity, in order to help decide whether patients <a id="page751"></a>may proceed directly to surgery or should be investigated further, such as with noninvasive stress testing or cardiac catheterization.<sup><a href="ch035-sec04.xhtml#bib1">1</a>,<a href="ch035-sec04.xhtml#bib2">2</a>,<a href="ch035-sec04.xhtml#bib4">4</a></sup></p>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt35-2"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;35.2</span> Cardiac Conditions and Risk Factors</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:45%;"></col>
<col style="width:55%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Active Cardiac Conditions</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Risk Factors as Per the Revised Cardiac Risk Index</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Unstable ischemia, recent MI</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Ischemic heart disease (stable angina, remote MI)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Decompensated CHF</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">History of CHF</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Significant arrhythmias</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">History of CVD</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Severe valvular disease</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Renal insufficiency</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Significant pulmonary hypertension</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Diabetes mellitus requiring insulin</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">CHF, congestive heart failure; CVD, cerebrovascular disease; MI, myocardial infarction.</p>
<p class="u_tfoot">Data from Fleisher LA, Fleischmann KE, Auerbach AD, et al. 2014 ACC/AHA guideline on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and management of patients undergoing noncardiac surgery: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on practice guidelines. <em>Circulation</em>. 2014;130:2215-2245.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen617">E. Common Pathologies and Comorbidities</h5>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>Malignancies</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">The majority of patients presenting for thoracic surgery will have a malignancy, including lung cancers, pleural and mediastinal tumors, and esophageal cancer. These patients should be assessed for the &#x201C;4-M&#x2019;s&#x201D; associated with malignancy: <strong><em>Mass effects</em></strong> (obstructive pneumonia, superior vena cava [SVC] syndrome, etc.), <strong><em>Metabolic abnormalities</em></strong> (hypercalcemia, Lambert-Eaton syndrome, etc.), <strong><em>Metastases</em></strong> (brain, bone, liver, and adrenal), and <strong><em>Medications</em></strong> (adjuvant chemotherapy and radiation).<sup><a href="ch035-sec04.xhtml#bib1">1</a>,<a href="ch035-sec04.xhtml#bib2">2</a></sup></p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">The &#x201C;4-M&#x2019;s&#x201D; associated with malignancy are: <em>M</em>ass effect, <em>M</em>etabolic abnormalities, <em>M</em>etastases, and <em>M</em>edications.</p>
</div>
<h6 class="h6">Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease</h6>
<p class="nonindent">This is the most common concurrent illness in the thoracic surgical population. Patients should be <strong><em>free of exacerbation</em></strong> before elective surgery and may have fewer postoperative pulmonary complications when intensive chest physiotherapy is initiated preoperatively. Pulmonary complications are also decreased in thoracic surgical patients who cease smoking for more than 4&#x00A0;weeks before surgery. Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and limited or unknown exercise tolerance may benefit from an arterial blood gas (ABG) test preoperatively, if the results prove helpful in weaning mechanical ventilation at the conclusion of surgery. Other considerations in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients include the presence of bullous disease, pulmonary hypertension with right heart dysfunction, and the risk of dynamic hyperinflation due to gas trapping.<sup><a href="ch035-sec04.xhtml#bib1">1</a>-<a href="ch035-sec04.xhtml#bib3">3</a></sup></p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>