<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec200">VII. Emergencies</h4>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><em>Antepartum hemorrhage</em></strong> occurs due to either acute abnormalities associated with the uterus or placenta (placental abruption or uterine rupture) or abnormal implantation of the placenta (previa).</p>
<p class="video"><video data-id="YCWJFaqv" controls="controls" class="jwp-video" crossorigin="anonymous" style="width:100%; height:auto; width:320px; height:240px;">Browser issues</video></p>
<p class="video1" id="vid31-4"><strong>VIDEO 31.4</strong></p>
<p class="video2"><strong>Ruptured Ectopic Pregnancy</strong></p>
<p class="indent"><strong><em>Placental abruption</em></strong> occurs when a portion of the placenta prematurely separates off its implant site on the uterus. Large abruptions can cause significant blood loss, DIC, and maternal instability, in addition to fetal distress or demise. Risk factors for abruption include advanced age, hypertension, diabetes, smoking, trauma, and cocaine use. Treatment is delivery and fluid and blood product administration. Coagulation should be monitored, including fibrinogen level, as abnormalities may be present contraindicating neuraxial anesthesia.</p>
<p class="indent"><strong><em>Uterine rupture</em></strong> occurs most often in women with a history of previous cesarean delivery, in particular with a &#x201C;classical&#x201D; vertical uterine scar. Uterine rupture is a surgical emergency and can be associated with severe bleeding. Uterine rupture is less common if a low transverse uterine scar is present, and a vaginal trial of labor (VTOL) may be offered to appropriate patients. A team must be immediately available to provide cesarean delivery for patients undergoing a VTOL.</p>
<p class="indent"><strong><em>Placenta previa</em></strong> occurs when the placenta implants either very close to or completely over the cervical os. Vaginal delivery is not possible without maternal and fetal consequences. Placenta previa is associated with maternal hemorrhage and with other abnormalities of placentation such as placenta accreta. <a id="page668"></a>When placenta previa occurs in the setting of five or more cesarean deliveries, the risk of invasive placentation or accreta is at least 75%. Continued bleeding from placenta previa is an indication for emergency cesarean delivery.</p>
<p class="indent"><strong><em>Vasa previa</em></strong> occurs when unprotected fetal vessels lie over the cervical os. Any vaginal bleeding may be fetal, and therefore represents an obstetric emergency requiring immediate delivery. Fetal mortality (in an otherwise normal fetus) is higher from vasa previa than any other condition. Therefore, mothers are admitted, and fetuses are continuously monitored until planned early cesarean delivery.</p>
<p class="indent">Patients with placenta or vasa previa are more likely to experience postpartum hemorrhage, so blood should be crossmatched and adequate access placed prior to cesarean delivery.</p>
<p class="indent"><strong><em>Postpartum hemorrhage</em></strong> (PPH) is the primary cause of maternal death worldwide and a leading contributor to maternal mortality and severe morbidity in the United States. PPH complicates 3% of deliveries<sup><a href="ch031-sec09.xhtml#bib17">17</a></sup> and is classically defined as estimated blood loss greater than 500&#x00A0;mL for a vaginal delivery or 1000&#x00A0;mL for a cesarean delivery. However, in clinical practice, these values approximate average blood loss totals. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists revised this definition to also include bleeding associated with signs or symptoms of hypovolemia within 24 hours of delivery regardless of delivery route.<sup><a href="ch031-sec09.xhtml#bib18">18</a></sup> The uterine blood flow at term is 700 to 900&#x00A0;mL/min. The uterus normally contracts postpartum, causing mechanical obstruction of bleeding vessels to prevent major maternal hemorrhage. The lack of uterine contraction postdelivery is called <strong><em>atony</em></strong> and 80% of PPH is due to uterine atony.<sup><a href="ch031-sec09.xhtml#bib17">17</a></sup> Risk factors for atony include a history of atony with previous pregnancy, retained placenta, chorioamnionitis, augmented or prolonged labor, uterine relaxants, and an overdistended uterus (macrosomic fetus, polyhydramnios, multiple gestation). Treatment of atony includes bimanual uterine massage, uterotonic drugs, discontinuation of drugs that may impair uterine contraction (inhaled anesthetics), or internal (Bakri balloon) or external (B-Lynch suture) compression of the uterus. Hysterectomy is indicated for severe unresponsive atony.</p>
<p class="indent">Medications commonly used for atony include oxytocin, prostaglandins, and methylergonovine (<strong><a href="#tt31-5">Table 31.5</a></strong>).</p>
<p class="indent"><strong><em>Abnormalities of placentation</em></strong> represent a major source of massive obstetric hemorrhage. Placenta accreta, increta, and percreta occur when the placenta abnormally adheres to (accreta) or invades (increta) the uterine myometrium or serosa (percreta). Previous cesarean deliveries or uterine surgery are associated with placental implantation abnormalities. Accreta can be diagnosed via ultrasound or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), although both remain imperfectly sensitive or specific. Planning for cesarean delivery and the possibility of large blood loss is crucial, and adequate large bore intravenous access and type and crossmatched blood products are needed. Safe surgical management of hysterectomy in patients with placenta percreta requires the involvement of subspecialties, including interventional radiology, gynecologic oncology, and general surgery.</p>
<p class="indent"><strong><em>Massive blood loss and transfusion</em></strong> can occur in obstetrical patients. Many hospitals have created massive transfusion protocols to facilitate the timely delivery of blood products when needed. High ratios of FFP to PRBC are recommended in the setting of ongoing loss and transfusion. Although the optimal ratio remains controversial, most experts endorse administration of 1:1 or 1:2 FFP to PRBC. One pooled unit of cryoprecipitate and one pooled unit of platelets should be given for every six PRBCs transfused or based on laboratory values. Experts recommend early identification and aggressive treatment of coagulopathy, and frequent laboratory monitoring can help guide therapy (eg, complete blood cell count, coagulation studies such as prothrombin time and international normalized ratio, partial thromboplastin time, fibrinogen, or thromboelastogram). Obstetric hemorrhage may be accompanied by fibrinolysis. Tranexamic acid use should be considered in PPH early in the course of bleeding unresponsive to uterotonics. Early tranexamic acid was associated with reduced risk of death due to bleeding during PPH without significant adverse effects.<sup><a href="ch031-sec09.xhtml#bib19">19</a></sup> Cell saver can be used during massive hemorrhage or for patients who refuse blood transfusion, with the patient&#x2019;s permission.</p>
<a id="page669"></a>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt31-5"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;31.5</span> Uterotonic Therapy</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:30%;"></col>
<col style="width:30%;"></col>
<col style="width:40%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Drug</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Dose</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Side Effects</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Oxytocin</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">20-40 U in 1000&#x00A0;mL LR by continuous IV infusion</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Hypotension, tachycardia</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Ergot alkaloids (Methergine)</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">0.2&#x00A0;mg IM q2&#x2013;4h prn</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Hypertension, vasoconstriction</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Coronary vasospasm</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">V/Q mismatch (ventilation perfusion mismatch), elevated pulmonary vascular resistance, and nausea and vomiting</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Carboprost (prostaglandin F<sub>2</sub><sub>&#x03B1;</sub>/Hemabate)</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">0.25&#x00A0;mg q15 min&#x00A0;&#x00D7;&#x00A0;8 doses, maximum 2&#x00A0;mg</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">&#x2191; pulmonary vascular resistance</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Bronchospasm</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Diarrhea/nausea</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Fever</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Misoprostol</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">800-1000&#x00A0;mg PR/PV/PO q2h</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Fever</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Nausea</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Dinoprostone</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">20&#x00A0;mg PO q2h</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Hypotension</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Nausea</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; LR, lactated Ringer&#x2019;s; PR/PV/PO, per rectum/per vaginum/per os; prn, as needed.</p>
<p class="u_tfoot">From Braveman FR, Scavone BM, Blessing ME, Wong CA. Obstetrical anesthesia. In: Barash PG, Cahalan MK, Cullen BF, et al, eds. <em>Clinical anesthesia</em>. 8th ed. Wolters Kluwer; 2018:1144-1177.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent"><strong><em>Amniotic fluid embolism</em></strong> (AFE) occurs when amniotic fluid enters the mother&#x2019;s circulation and causes a severe inflammatory response. AFE often occurs immediately surrounding delivery. Intact survival rate after AFE remains poor. Bronchospasm, acute pulmonary hypertension, circulatory shock, and DIC can all occur with AFE. Treatment is supportive and can include massive transfusion for DIC and resultant hemorrhage. Patients may be placed on extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for support of oxygenation and CO<sub>2</sub> elimination.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen528">A. Cardiopulmonary Arrest</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The incidence of peripartum maternal arrest is 1 in 30,000 deliveries.<sup><a href="ch031-sec09.xhtml#bib20">20</a></sup> Maternal arrest has many etiologies, including pulmonary or amniotic fluid embolism, drug errors, maternal comorbidities such as preeclampsia, coronary artery disease, severe valvular disease, or complications of general or neuraxial anesthesia. Initial treatment is cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) modified for the pregnant patient, using either manual left uterine displacement, a <a id="page670"></a>Cardiff wedge, or a &#x201C;human wedge&#x201D; on the knees of a provider. Other CPR modifications needed for the pregnant state include a slightly higher sternal placement of hands for chest compressions, use of cricoid pressure during bag mask ventilation until the trachea is intubated, and a high index of suspicion for drug errors as the source of the cardiac arrest, in particular magnesium overdose. Use of defibrillation, vasopressors, and inotropes all remain unchanged from adult advanced cardiac life support guidelines. Maternal CPR is almost always suboptimal due to the gravid uterus. If the source of the arrest is unknown or not immediately reversible, cesarean delivery should be performed <strong><em>in the labor and delivery room within 5 minutes of arrest</em></strong>. To achieve this goal, the team must make the decision to perform a cesarean delivery and make the incision within 4 minutes of arrest. With delivery of the fetus, adequate CPR can be delivered to the mother. Longer arrest-to-delivery intervals are associated with worse neonatal and maternal outcomes.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen529">B. Maternal Mortality</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The maternal mortality ratio refers to the number of maternal deaths during a given time period per 100,000 live births. In the United States, the maternal mortality ratio is 17.4 in 100,000. Wide racial and ethnic gaps exist with non-Hispanic black (37.1 in 100,000), non-Hispanic white (14.7), and Hispanic (11.8) women differing largely in terms of maternal mortality.<sup><a href="ch031-sec09.xhtml#bib21">21</a></sup> The leading contributors to mortality in the United States are cardiovascular diseases, hemorrhage, venous thromboembolism, infection, hypertensive diseases, cardiomyopathy, mental health diseases, and pregnancy-related conditions such as AFE. Globally, the maternal mortality ratio in low-income nations is 462 per 100,000 live births to as low as 11 per 100,000 in high-income nations.<sup><a href="ch031-sec09.xhtml#bib22">22</a></sup> Hemorrhage, sepsis, and pregnancy-induced hypertension are the leading causes of maternal death in undeveloped countries. The anesthesia-related maternal mortality ratio is 1.2 in 1 million; anesthesia is the cause of about 1.5% of maternal deaths in the United States.<sup><a href="ch031-sec09.xhtml#bib23">23</a></sup></p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>