<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/jquery.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
<!--<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-1.10.2.min.js'></script>-->
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-migrate-1.2.1.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery.qtip.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/etext.js'></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec202">IX. <a id="page674"></a>Anesthesia for Nonobstetric Surgery During Pregnancy</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Nonobstetric elective surgery during a desired pregnancy is not recommended. Occasionally, emergency conditions warrant surgery during pregnancy, the most common of which are appendicitis or trauma. The safest time to perform surgery during pregnancy is the second trimester because surgery during the first trimester is associated with spontaneous abortion and during the third trimester with preterm labor. Organogenesis occurs early in the first trimester, and it is still unclear what effects anesthetic agents may have on the developing fetus.</p>
<p class="indent">Confirmation of fetal heart tones both pre- and postoperatively is recommended. In certain cases, continuous fetal monitoring may be indicated, specifically if the fetus is viable and if staff qualified to perform emergency cesarean delivery are available. Most abdominal surgeries preclude the use of continuous fetal monitoring. Observation postoperatively is generally recommended due to the increased risk of preterm labor.</p>
<p class="indent">Regional anesthesia is preferred whenever possible, including for short, uncomplicated open abdominal surgery, such as appendectomy. If not possible (eg, for laparoscopic surgery), general anesthesia should be induced via rapid sequence induction and intubation with cricoid pressure. Patients over 14&#x00A0;weeks&#x2019; gestation should be positioned in left uterine displacement if feasible. Normotension, maintenance of eucarbia, and adequate oxygenation will provide the fetus and mother with adequate perfusion and oxygenation. Most anesthetic agents, other than the neuromuscular blocking agents, cross the placenta with unknown fetal effects. Neuromuscular blockade reversal agents do cross the placenta, but glycopyrrolate does not. Therefore, the anesthesiologist should reverse blockade with atropine to avoid fetal effects of reversal, including bradycardia.</p>
<p class="indent">In summary, providing optimal anesthetic care to pregnant patients requires consideration of the many maternal physiologic changes pregnancy induces, as well as recognition of the effects of anesthesia on both the mother and the fetus. The anesthesiologist is responsible for providing analgesia for labor, but also for guiding the response to complex medical and emergency clinical situations. A thorough knowledge of the medical histories of patients who are admitted to labor and delivery, as well as coordinated multidisciplinary care, is of the utmost importance to ensure optimal outcomes for both mothers and babies.</p>
<p class="BIBLIOGRAPHYpTitle">References</p>
<ol class="ref"><li id="bib1">Quinn A, Milne D, Columb M, et al. Failed tracheal intubation in obstetric anaesthesia: 2 yr national case&#x2013;control study in the UK. <em>Br J Anaesth</em>. 2013;110(1):74-80. PMID: 22986421.</li>
<li id="bib2">Sharma S, Alexander J, Messick G, et al. Cesarean delivery: a randomized trial of epidural analgesia versus intravenous meperidine analgesia during labor in nulliparous women. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2002;96:546-551. PMID: 11873026.</li>
<li id="bib3">Gambling D, Berkowitz J, Farrell T, et al. Randomized controlled comparison of epidural analgesia and combined spinal-epidural analgesia in a private practice setting: pain scores during first and second stages of labor and at delivery. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2013;116(3):636-643. PMID: 23400985.</li>
<li id="bib4"><a id="page675"></a>Pan P, Bogard T, Owen M. Incidence and characteristics of failures in obstetric neuraxial analgesia and anesthesia: a retrospective analysis of 19,259 deliveries. <em>Int J Obstet Anesth</em>. 2004;13:227-233. PMID: 15477051.</li>
<li id="bib5">Chau A, Bibbo C, Huang CC, et al. Dural puncture epidural technique improves labor analgesia quality with fewer side effects compared with epidural and combined spinal epidural techniques: a randomized clinical trial. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2017;124:560-569. PMID: 28067707.</li>
<li id="bib6">Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Osterman MJK, Driscoll AK; National Center for Health Statistics, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; National Vital Statistics Reports. Births: Final Data for 2018. <em>Natl Vital Stat Rep</em>. 2019;68(13):1-47. PMID: 30707672.</li>
<li id="bib7">Osterman MJK. Recent trends in vaginal birth after cesarean delivery: United States, 2016-2018. <em>NCHS Data Brief</em>. 2020;(359):1-8. PMID: 32487289.</li>
<li id="bib8">Lee AJ, Landau R, Mattingly JL, et al. Left lateral table tilt for elective cesarean delivery under spinal anesthesia has no effect on neonatal acid-base status. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2017;127:241-249. PMID: 28598894.</li>
<li id="bib9">Palmer C, Emerson S, Volgoropolous D, et al. Dose-response relationship of intrathecal morphine for postcesarean analgesia. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 1999;90:437-444. PMID: 9952150.</li>
<li id="bib10">Palmer C, Nogami W, Van Maren G, et al. Postcesarean epidural morphine: a dose-response study. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2000;90:887-891. PMID: 10735794.</li>
<li id="bib11">Horlocker T, Burton A, Connis R, et al. Practice guidelines for the prevention, detection, and management of respiratory depression associated with neuraxial opioid administration: an updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Neuraxial Opioids. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2009;110:218-230. PMID: 19194148.</li>
<li id="bib12">ACOG Practice Bulletin. Intrapartum fetal heart rate monitoring: nomenclature, interpretation, and general management principles. <em>Obstet Gynecol</em>. 2009;114(1):192-202. PMID: 19546798.</li>
<li id="bib13">Alfirevic Z, Devane D, Gyte GM. Continuous cardiotocography (CTG) as a form of electronic fetal monitoring (EFM) for fetal assessment during labour. <em>Cochrane Database Syst Rev</em>. 2006;3:CD006066. PMID: 16856111.</li>
<li id="bib14">Gestational hypertension and preeclampsia: ACOG Practice Bulletin Summary, Number 222. <em>Obstet Gynecol</em>. 2020;135(6):1492-1495. PMID: 32443079.</li>
<li id="bib15">The Eclampsia Trial Collaborative Group. Which anticonvulsant for women with eclampsia? Evidence from the Collaborative Eclampsia Trial. <em>Lancet</em>. 1995;345:1455-1463. PMID: 7769899.</li>
<li id="bib16">Segal S. Labor epidural analgesia and maternal fever. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2010;111:1467-1475. PMID: 20861420.</li>
<li id="bib17">Bateman B, Berman M, Riley L, et al. The epidemioilogy of postpartum hemorrhage in a large, nationwide sample of deliveries. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2010;110:1368-1373. PMID: 20237047.</li>
<li id="bib18">Committee on Practice Bulletins-Obstetrics. Practice Bulletin No. 183: postpartum hemorrhage. <em>Obstet Gynecol</em>. 2011;130(4):e168-e186. PMID: 28937571.</li>
<li id="bib19">Shakur H, Roberts I, Fawole B, et al. The WOMAN Trial (World Maternal Antifibrinolytic Trial). Tranexamic acid for the treatment of postpartum haemorrhage: an international randomised, double blind placebo-controlled trial. <em>Lancet</em>. 2017;389:2105-2116. PMID: 20398351.</li>
<li id="bib20">Morris S, Stacey M. Resuscitation in pregnancy. <em>Br Med J</em>. 2003;327:1277-1279. PMID: 14644974.</li>
<li id="bib21">National Center for Health Statistics. <em>National Vital Statistics System</em>. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; 2018.</li>
<li id="bib22">World Health Organization. <em>Trends in Maternal Mortality: 2000 to 2017. Estimates by WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA, World Bank Group and the United Nations Population Division</em>. World Health Organization; 2019.</li>
<li id="bib23">Hawkins J, Chang J, Palmer S, et al. Anesthesia-related maternal mortality in the United States: 1979&#x2013;2002. <em>Obstet Gynecol</em>. 2011;117:69-74. PMID: 21173646.</li>
<li id="bib24">Choi P, Galinski S, Takeuchi L, et al. PDPH is a common complication of neuraxial blockade in parturients: a meta-analysis of obstetrical studies. <em>Can J Anesth</em>. 2003;50(5):460-469. PMID: 12734154.</li>
<li id="bib25">Wong C, Scavone B, Dugan S, et al. Incidence of postpartum lumbosacral spine and lower extremity nerve injuries. <em>Obstet Gynecol</em>. 2003;101:279-288. PMID: 12576251.</li>
</ol>
<a id="page676"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp31_1" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_caf/31_OB_Anesthesia/story.html'">Infographic 31.1 Neuraxial Anesthesia for Cesarean Section At a Glance <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<a id="page677"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp31_2" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/31A_Obstetric_Anesthesia/index.html'">Interactive Video Lecture 31a. Obstetric Anesthesia <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<a id="page678"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp31_3" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/31B_Obstetric_Anesthesia/index.html'">Interactive Video Lecture 31b. Obstetric Anesthesia <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<div class="link-me" id="grp31_4" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/31C_Obstetric_Anesthesia/index.html'">Interactive Video Lecture 31c. Obstetric Anesthesia <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>