<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/jquery.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
<!--<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-1.10.2.min.js'></script>-->
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-migrate-1.2.1.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery.qtip.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/etext.js'></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec193">X. Anesthesia for Spine Trauma and Complex Spine Surgery</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen506">A. Spinal Cord Injury</h5>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><em>Acute spinal cord injury</em></strong> often necessitates emergency surgery to stabilize the spinal column and prevent secondary injury. Spinal cord injuries, like traumatic brain injuries, often involve young people, and may be due to motor <a id="page643"></a>vehicle accidents, falls, violence, or sports-related accidents. Cervical spine injuries are most common, as this is the most mobile part of the spine, followed by thoracic and lumbar injuries. Incomplete tetraplegia (C3-5) is the most common neurologic outcome, followed by complete paraplegia (T1 and below), complete tetraplegia, and incomplete paraplegia. Cervical injuries are the most devastating from a neurologic perspective, as high cervical injuries may impair vital respiratory function (C3-5) necessitating permanent tracheotomy and ventilator support and cardiac accelerator function (T1-5). Following acute spinal cord injury, spinal cord autoregulation is impaired and &#x201C;spinal shock&#x201D; may be seen, characterized by flaccid paralysis and decreased spinal cord perfusion, lasting 24 hours. During this time, it is critical to prevent secondary injury by providing aggressive hemodynamic support.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen507">B. Comorbid Injuries</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Up to 42% of patients presenting with acute spinal cord injury may also have a concomitant injury. Life-threatening injuries must be addressed, while ensuring that spinal alignment is maintained to avoid adding secondary injury to the spinal cord.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen508">C. Initial Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Patients presenting with acute spinal cord injury must be immediately evaluated for compromised ventilatory and hemodynamic function. Airway management in cervical spinal injury focuses on maintaining in-line stabilization throughout the intubation process, and may require the use of fiberoptic intubation. In a stable patient, radiographic studies are helpful in assessing the degree of cervical injury and options for intubation. Succinylcholine is safe in the initial 24 hours following spinal cord injury. Extrajunctional nicotinic receptors, which may cause a hyperkalemic response, have not yet fully developed. Fluid or blood product resuscitation and vasopressors or inotropes are often needed to support the blood pressure, which is important both from a systemic standpoint and to prevent secondary injury in the spinal cord due to ischemia and worsening edema due to cellular dysfunction. Arterial blood pressure monitoring and large-bore intravenous access are required. Other strategies to protect the spinal cord, such as corticosteroids, naloxone, or hypothermia, may be instituted at this time, but convincing data for these therapies are lacking. Most anesthesiologists will, however, maintain the mean arterial pressure above 85&#x00A0;mm Hg to ensure adequate spinal cord perfusion (recommended for at least 7&#x00A0;days from the date of injury).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen509">D. Intraoperative Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Anesthetic choice during maintenance of anesthesia for spinal cord injury should focus on two key considerations: maintaining blood pressure (mean&#x00A0;&#x003E;&#x00A0;85&#x00A0;mm Hg) and allowing for intraoperative neuromonitoring (SSEPs, MEPs, EMG). Complex spine surgery, which often involves multiple level fusions and osteotomies, should also take into account the real possibility of significant (sometimes multiple blood volumes) surgical bleeding and the need for postoperative mechanical ventilation in light of massive transfusion. Adequate intravascular access is vitally important. Measurements of arterial blood gas, coagulation parameters, and hemoglobin levels should be performed frequently. Close communication with the surgeon is important. In noninfectious, nontumor cases, intraoperative cell salvage can be quite helpful in reducing the total amount of allogeneic blood transfused. Other blood-sparing techniques, such <a id="page644"></a>as acute normovolemic hemodilution and deliberate hypotension, have largely fallen out of favor, due to the known harmful effects of anemia and hypotension on the neurologic and cardiovascular systems.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen510">E. Complications of Anesthesia for Spine Surgery</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Fortunately, complications specifically related to anesthesia for spine surgery are rare, but they are often devastating when they occur. <strong><em>Postoperative visual loss (POVL)</em></strong> is one such complication, with an incidence of 0.3% after spine surgery.<sup><a href="#bib11">11</a></sup> Most cases of POVL are thought to be due to posterior ischemic optic neuropathy, with central retinal artery occlusion and cortical blindness being much less common. Risk factors for POVL (associated but not necessarily causative) include hypotension, anemia, blood loss &#x003E;1000&#x00A0;mL, surgical duration &#x003E;6 hours, and the prone position itself which causes increased intraocular pressure. Ophthalmologic consultation should be immediately undertaken if this complication is suspected. Another complication of spine surgery in which anesthetic technique may be implicated is anterior spinal artery syndrome, which is caused by a sustained hypoperfusion of the anterior spinal artery and leads to motor weakness. Finally, deliberate hypotension, hypothermia, and hypovolemia may predispose spine surgery patients to the formation of deep venous thromboses (DVT) and subsequent pulmonary emboli (PE). Lumbar fusion is associated with an incidence of symptomatic DVT of up to 4%, with a 2% incidence of PE. Because prophylaxis with an anticoagulant is often impossible prior to spine surgery (for fear of worsening blood loss and formation of epidural hematoma), an inferior vena cava filter is often placed prior to these surgeries to minimize the chance of developing a significant PE.</p>
<p class="BIBLIOGRAPHYpTitle">References</p>
<ol class="ref"><li id="bib1">Isley MR, Edmonds Jr HL, Stecker M; American Society of Neurophysiological Monitoring. Guidelines for intraoperative neuromonitoring using raw (analog or digital waveforms) and quantitative electroencephalography: a position statement by the American Society of Neurophysiological Monitoring. <em>J Clin Monit Comput</em>. 2009;23(6):369-390.</li>
<li id="bib2">Sloan TB, Heyer EJ. Anesthesia for intraoperative neurophysiologic monitoring of the spinal cord. <em>J Clin Neurophysiol</em>. 2002;19(5):430-443.</li>
<li id="bib3">Chan MTV, Hedrick TL, Egan TD, et al; Perioperative Quality Initiative (POQI) 6 Workgroup. American society for enhanced recovery and perioperative quality initiative joint consensus statement on the role of neuromonitoring in perioperative outcomes: electroencephalography. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2020;130(5):1278-1291.</li>
<li id="bib4">Kalanuria A, Nyquist PA, Armonda RA, et al. Use of transcranial Doppler (TCD) ultrasound in the neurocritical care unit. <em>Neurosurg Clin</em>. 2013;24(3):441-456.</li>
<li id="bib5">Kitagawa R, Yokobori S, Mazzeo AT, et al. Microdialysis in the neurocritical care unit. <em>Neurosurg Clin</em>. 2013;24(3):417-426.</li>
<li id="bib6">Ghosh A, Elwell C, Smith M. Cerebral near-infrared spectroscopy in adults: a work in progress. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2012;115(6):1373-1383.</li>
<li id="bib7">Todd MM, Hindman BJ, Clarke WR, et al; Intraoperative Hypothermia for Aneurysm Surgery Trial (IHAST) Investigators. Mild intraoperative hypothermia during surgery for intracranial aneurysm. <em>N Engl J Med</em>. 2005;352(2):135-145.</li>
<li id="bib8">Pasternak JJ, McGregor DG, Schroeder DR, et al; IHAST Investigators. Hyperglycemia in patients undergoing cerebral aneurysm surgery: its association with long-term gross neurologic and neuropsychological function. <em>Mayo Clin Proc</em>. 2008;83(4):406-417.</li>
<li id="bib9"><a id="page645"></a>Bebawy JF, Gupta DK, Bendok BR, et al. Adenosine-induced flow arrest to facilitate intracranial aneurysm clip ligation: dose-response data and safety profile. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2010;110(5):1406-1411.</li>
<li id="bib10">Talke PO, Sharma D, Heyer EJ, Bergese SD, Blackham KA, Stevens RD. Society for neuroscience in anesthesiology and critical care expert consensus statement: anesthetic management of endovascular treatment for acute ischemic stroke*. Endorsed by the society of NeuroInterventional surgery and the neurocritical care society. <em>J Neurosurg Anesthesiol</em>. 2014;26(2):95-108.</li>
<li id="bib11">American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Perioperative Visual Loss. Practice advisory for perioperative visual loss associated with spine surgery: an updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Perioperative Visual Loss. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2012;116(2):274-285.</li>
</ol>
<a id="page646"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp30_1" onclick="openLinkInNewTab('https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/30A_Anesthesia_for_Neurosurgery/index.html');">Interactive Video Lecture 30a. Anesthesia for Neurosurgery <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<a id="page647"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp30_2" onclick="openLinkInNewTab('https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/30B_Anesthesia_for_Neurosurgery/index.html');">Interactive Video Lecture 30b. Anesthesia for Neurosurgery <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<div class="link-me" id="grp30_3" onclick="openLinkInNewTab('https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/30C_Anesthesia_for_Neurosurgery/index.html');">Interactive Video Lecture 30c. Anesthesia for Neurosurgery <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>