<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/jquery.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
<!--<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-1.10.2.min.js'></script>-->
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-migrate-1.2.1.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery.qtip.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/etext.js'></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec225">IV. Postoperative Management</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen634">A. Pain Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><em>Thoracic epidural analgesia</em></strong> (TEA) has been considered the gold standard for postoperative pain control in patients undergoing thoracotomy. When thoracotomy pain is controlled, the risk of pulmonary complications is decreased. In patients with coronary artery disease, thoracic epidural local anesthetics also seem to reduce myocardial oxygen demand. When there is a contraindication to placement of a thoracic epidural, another excellent choice for analgesia is a paravertebral infusion of local anesthetic via a catheter that may be placed by the anesthesiologist using a landmark or ultrasound-guided technique or directly by the surgeon during an open thoracotomy. This has been shown in a systematic review to be as effective as TEA.<sup><a href="#bib11">11</a></sup> Other regional anesthesia options for analgesia in thoracic surgery include intercostal blocks and the more recently described serratus anterior plane block and erector spinae plane block.<sup><a href="#bib12">12</a></sup> Additionally, patient-controlled opioid analgesia may be used with multimodal analgesia, such as acetaminophen, gabapentin, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories. Postoperative ketamine use is increasing in the thoracic surgical population.<sup><a href="#bib13">13</a></sup> Institutions differ in their practices regarding the use of catheter techniques versus intravenous patient-controlled analgesia for minimally invasive thoracic surgeries.<sup><a href="#bib1">1</a>,<a href="#bib3">3</a></sup> Optimal analgesia will help contribute to enhanced recovery after thoracic surgery, a movement that has been gaining ground in a variety of surgical specialties.<sup><a href="#bib14">14</a></sup></p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen635">B. Complications</h5>
<p class="nonindent">As mentioned previously, respiratory and cardiac complications account for the majority of morbidity and mortality following thoracic surgery. There are multiple potential complications that can occur in the immediate postoperative period, such as <strong><em>torsion</em></strong> of a remaining lobe after lobectomy, dehiscence of a bronchial stump, hemorrhage from a major vessel, or cardiac ischemia or arrhythmias. Among these possible complications, two will be discussed in more detail: respiratory failure and cardiac herniation.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Respiratory Failure</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Patients with decreased respiratory function preoperatively are at increased risk of postoperative respiratory complications. In addition, age, the presence of coronary artery disease, and the extent of lung resection play major roles in predicting postoperative respiratory failure. Decreased pulmonary complications in high-risk patients are associated with the use of TEA during the perioperative period. Chest physiotherapy, incentive spirometry, and early ambulation are also crucial in order to minimize pulmonary complications after lung resection. For an uncomplicated lung resection, <strong><em>early</em></strong> extubation is desirable to avoid potential complications that can arise due to <strong><em>prolonged</em></strong> intubation and mechanical ventilation. Current therapy to treat acute respiratory <a id="page762"></a>failure is aimed at supportive measures that provide better oxygenation, treat infection, and provide vital organ support without further damaging the lungs.<sup><a href="#bib1">1</a></sup></p>
<h6 class="h6">Cardiac Herniation</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Acute cardiac herniation is an <strong><em>infrequent complication of pneumonectomy</em></strong> when the pericardium is incompletely closed or the closure breaks down. It usually occurs immediately or within 24 hours after chest surgery and is associated with &#x003E;50% mortality. When cardiac herniation occurs after a right pneumonectomy, the impairment of venous return to the heart leads to a sudden increase in CVP, tachycardia, profound hypotension, and shock. An acute SVC syndrome ensues due to the torsion of the heart. In contrast, when the cardiac herniation occurs after a left-sided pneumonectomy, there is less cardiac rotation, but the edge of the pericardium compresses the myocardium. This may lead to myocardial ischemia, the development of arrhythmias, and ventricular outflow tract obstruction.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">One of the catastrophic complication of pneumonectomy is cardiac herniation, and it requires immediate surgical treatment to ensure survival.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">The differential diagnosis of hemodynamic instability after thoracic surgery should include massive intrathoracic hemorrhage, pulmonary embolism, or mediastinal shift from improper chest drain management. Immediate diagnosis and surgical treatment of cardiac herniation by <strong><em>relocation of the heart</em></strong> to its anatomic position is key to patient survival. Maneuvers to minimize the cardiovascular effects include positioning the patient in the full lateral position with the <strong><em>operated side up</em></strong>. Vasopressors or inotropes are required to support the circulation while exploration takes place.<sup><a href="#bib1">1</a></sup></p>
<p class="BIBLIOGRAPHYpTitle">References</p>
<ol class="ref"><li id="bib1">Slinger P, Campos J. Anesthesia for thoracic surgery. In: Gropper M, ed. <em>Miller&#x2019;s Anesthesia</em>. 9th ed. Elsevier, Inc; 2020:1648-1716.</li>
<li id="bib2">Slinger P, Darling G. Preanesthetic assessment for thoracic surgery. In: Slinger P, ed. <em>Principles and Practice of Anesthesia for Thoracic Surgery</em>. Springer; 2011:11-35.</li>
<li id="bib3">Eisenkraft J, Cohen E, Neustein S. Anesthesia for thoracic surgery. In: Barash P, Cullen B, Stoelting R, Cahalan M, Stock M, Ortega R, eds. <em>Clinical Anesthesia</em>. 7th ed.. Wolters Kluwer Health/Lippincott Williams and Wilkins; 2013:1030-1075.</li>
<li id="bib4">Fleisher LA, Fleischmann KE, Auerbach AD, et al. 2014 ACC/AHA guideline on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and management of patients undergoing noncardiac surgery: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on practice guidelines. <em>Circulation</em>. 2014;130:2215-2245. PMID: 25085962.</li>
<li id="bib5">Lohser J, Donington JS, Mitchell JD, Brodsky JB, Raman J, Slinger P. Anesthetic management of major hemorrhage during mediastinoscopy. <em>J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth</em>. 2005;19:678-683. PMID: 16202909.</li>
<li id="bib6">Powell ES, Pearce AC, Cook D, et al. UK pneumonectomy outcome study: a prospective observational study of pneumonectomy outcome. <em>J Cardiothorac Surg</em>. 2009;4:41. PMID: 19643006.</li>
<li id="bib7">Buise M, Van Bommel J, Mehra M, Tilanus HW, Van Zundert A, Gommers D. Pulmonary morbidity following esophagectomy is decreased after introduction of a multimodal anesthetic regimen. <em>Acta Anaesthesiol Belg</em>. 2008;59:257-261. PMID: 19235524.</li>
<li id="bib8">Pinsonneault C, Fortier J, Donati F. Tracheal resection and reconstruction. <em>Can J Anaesth</em>. 1999;46:439-455. PMID: 10349923.</li>
<li id="bib9"><a id="page763"></a>Takeda S, Miyoshi S, Omori K, Okumura M, Matsuda H. Surgical rescue for life-threatening hypoxemia caused by a mediastinal tumor. <em>Ann Thorac Surg</em>. 1999;68:2324-2326. PMID: 10617025.</li>
<li id="bib10">White MC, Stoddart PA. Anesthesia for thymectomy in children with myasthenia gravis. <em>Pediatr Anaesth</em>. 2004;14:625-635. PMID: 15283820.</li>
<li id="bib11">Joshi G, Bonnet F, Shah R, et al. A systematic review of randomized trials evaluating regional techniques for postthoracotomy analgesia. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2008;107:1026-1040. PMID: 18713924.</li>
<li id="bib12">Jack J, McLellan E, Veryck B, Englesakis MF, Chin KJ. The role of serratus anterior plane and pectoral nerve blocks in cardiac surgery, thoracic surgery and trauma: a qualitative systematic review. <em>Anaesthesia</em>. 2020;75(10):1372-1385. PMID: 32062870.</li>
<li id="bib13">Moyse D, Kaye A, Diaz J, Qadri MY, Lindsay D, Pyati S. Perioperative ketamine administration for thoracotomy pain. <em>Pain Physician</em>. 2017;20:173-184. PMID: 28339431.</li>
<li id="bib14">Raft J, Richebe P. Anesthesia for thoracic ambulatory surgery. <em>Curr Opin Anaesthesiol</em>. 2019;32:735-742. PMID: 31567511.</li>
</ol>
<a id="page764"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp35_1" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_caf/35_Ventilation_and_Perfusion/story.html'">Infographic 35.1 A Closer Look at Ventilation and Perfusion <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<a id="page765"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp35_2" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/35A_Cardiac_Anesthesia/index.html'">Interactive Video Lecture 35a. Cardiac Anesthesia <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<a id="page766"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp35_3" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/35B_Cardiac_Anesthesia/index.html'">Interactive Video Lecture 35b. Cardiac Anesthesia <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>