<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/jquery.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
<!--<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-1.10.2.min.js'></script>-->
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-migrate-1.2.1.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery.qtip.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/etext.js'></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec207">V. Disaster Preparedness</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen559">A. Mass Casualties</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Any event that overwhelms the medical capacity of a given facility is defined as a <strong><em>mass casualty incident</em></strong>. These events run the spectrum from natural disasters to public transit accidents to warfare. The concept of <strong><em>triage</em></strong> is used to sort patients who are most likely to benefit from the limited medical resources that are available. Patients who are conscious, able to maintain their airway, and are ambulatory are considered &#x201C;walking wounded&#x201D; and are labeled low priority. Patients in cardiac arrest are considered nonsalvageable and are managed expectantly. Conscious or unconscious patients who are in need of emergent surgery to save life, limb, or eyesight are given the highest priority. Less <a id="page696"></a>critically ill patients, including those who will survive for at least several hours without surgery, are given medium priority.</p>
<p class="indent">Anesthesia departments should have an established <strong><em>disaster plan</em></strong> to structure procedures and staffing in mass casualty events. This plan should include anesthesia staffing in the triage area or emergency department to coordinate the flow of patients to the operating room and to coordinate anesthesia resources. In the operating room, all cases already undergoing surgery should be finished, while new elective cases should be postponed. The departmental disaster plan should also include a process for mass casualty deactivation and return to the usual activity.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen560">B. Biologic, Chemical, and Nuclear Warfare</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The role of the anesthesiologist in a biologic, chemical, or nuclear attack is limited. Any therapy that is undertaken will be of a basic nature. Proper training with chemical or biologic protective gear is necessary to manage patients at any level of care. Proper decontamination is mandatory before patients enter a &#x201C;clean&#x201D; environment (eg, the hospital).</p>
<p class="indent">In biologic attacks, a healthy immune system and appropriate vaccinations are the main line of defense for care providers. Prompt identification of the involved organism can guide antimicrobial therapy. In chemical attacks, agents are typically dispersed quickly, and protective gear is needed to survive the initial phases of the attack. Similarly, identification of the chemical is mandatory to guide therapy with appropriate antidotes. In nuclear attack, the initial and secondary blasts do the most damage. Nuclear fallout presents a risk of radiation exposure. The only protection against this sort of attack is reinforced shelter and distance from the event. The long-term risk of cancer from radioactive fallout is unclear and often overestimated. Interestingly, the citizens of Hiroshima and Nagasaki experienced lower-than-expected rates of cancer following the nuclear attacks there in 1945. Some groups advocate iodine supplementation in the event of nuclear disasters (ie, nuclear power plant meltdown). However, any protection from radiation exposure that is provided by iodine is limited to the thyroid gland and is not a widely recommended practice.</p>
<p class="BIBLIOGRAPHYpTitle">References</p>
<ol class="ref"><li id="bib1">Algie CM, Mahar RK, Tan HB, Wilson G, Mahar PD, Wasiak J. Effectiveness and risks of cricoid pressure during rapid sequence induction for endotracheal intubation. <em>Cochrane Database Syst Rev</em>. 2015;(11):CD011656. PMID: 26578526.</li>
<li id="bib2">Chesnut RM, Marshall LF, Klauber MR, et al. The role of secondary brain injury in determining outcome from severe head injury. <em>J Trauma</em>. 1993;34(2):216-222. PMID: 8459458.</li>
<li id="bib3">Hurlbert RJ, Hadley MN, Walters BC, et al. Pharmacological therapy for acute spinal cord injury. <em>Neurosurgery</em>. 2015;76(suppl 1):S71-S83. PMID: 25692371.</li>
<li id="bib4">Patel MB, Humble SS, Cullinane DC, et al. Cervical spine collar clearance in the obtunded adult blunt trauma patient: a systematic review and practice management guideline from the Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma. <em>J Trauma Acute Care Surg</em>. 2015;78(2):430. PMID: 25757133.</li>
<li id="bib5">Tobin JM, Grabinsky A, McCunn M, et al. A checklist for trauma and emergency anesthesia. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2013;117(5):1178-1184. PMID: 24108256.</li>
<li id="bib6"><a id="page697"></a>Nouruzi-Sedeh P, Schumann M, Groeben H. Laryngoscopy via Macintosh blade versus GlideScope: success rate and time for endotracheal intubation in untrained medical personnel. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2009;110(1):32-37. PMID: 19104167.</li>
<li id="bib7">Spahn DR, Bouillon B, Cerny V, et al. The European guideline on management of major bleeding and coagulopathy following trauma. <em>Crit Care</em>. 2019;23(1):98. PMID: 30917843.</li>
<li id="bib8">Holcomb JB, Wade CE, Michalek JE, et al. Increased plasma and platelet to red blood cell ratios improves outcome in 466 massively transfused civilian trauma patients. <em>Ann Surg</em>. 2008;248(3):447-458. PMID: 18791365.</li>
<li id="bib9">Williams-Johnson J, McDonald A, Strachan GG, Williams E. Effects of tranexamic acid on death, vascular occlusive events, and blood transfusion in trauma patients with significant haemorrhage (CRASH-2): a randomised, placebo-controlled trial. <em>West Indian Med J</em>. 2010;59(6):612-624. PMID: 21702233.</li>
<li id="bib10">Plurad DS, Talving P, Lam L, Inaba K, Green D, Demetriades D. Early vasopressor use in critical injury is associated with mortality independent from volume status. <em>J Trauma</em>. 2011;71(3):565-572. PMID: 21908995.</li>
<li id="bib11"><a id="page698"></a><a id="page699"></a>Kaiser HE, Kim CM, Sharar SR, Olivar HP. Advances in perioperative and critical care of the burn patient: anesthesia management of major thermal burn injuries in adults. <em>Adv Anesth</em>. 2013;31(1):137-161.</li>
</ol>
<div class="link-me" id="grp32_1" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/32A_Trauma_and_Burn_Anesthesia/index.html'">Interactive Video Lecture 32a. Trauma and Burn Anesthesia <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<div class="link-me" id="grp32_2" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/32B_Trauma_and_Burn_Anesthesia/index.html'">Interactive Video Lecture 32b. Trauma and Burn Anesthesia <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>