<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec211">IV. Perioperative Management</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen566">A. Preoperative Assessment</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Children should be evaluated for common coexisting conditions.<sup><a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib1">1</a>,<a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib2">2</a></sup> One of the most common questions relates to children with ongoing <strong><em>upper respiratory infections</em></strong>. A large prospective trial evaluated healthy children scheduled for elective surgery. It assessed their respiratory symptoms for nasal drainage (clear or discolored yellow/green) as well as cough (dry or productive and color of sputum), lethargy, and fever for correlation with respiratory complications, including bronchospasm and laryngospasm.<sup><a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib19">19</a></sup> The relative risk for respiratory complications was &#x003E;1.5 if the child had active symptoms, including clear runny nose, green runny nose, moist cough, and fever. A general discussion between the parents, child, surgeon, and anesthesiologist should take place to determine the risk-benefit ratio for every scenario. A thorough preanesthetic discussion with the parents or responsible guardians should include the possibility of admission to the hospital for postoperative management.</p>
<p class="indent">The first observation of a child&#x2019;s behavior offers great insight into the developmental stage, as the <strong><em>developmental stages</em></strong> may not always correlate with a child&#x2019;s age. Children will naturally express anxiety around strangers and may not tolerate a thorough physical examination. <strong><em>Neurologic examination</em></strong> should focus on the child&#x2019;s activity level and note any anomalies such as contractures, <a id="page709"></a>weakness of extremities, or abnormal appearance. The <strong><em>cardiovascular examination</em></strong> focuses on auscultation of the heart sounds, noting that heart murmurs are common in newborns (patent ductus arteriosus continuous murmur, patent foramen ovale, atrial septal defect, and VSD). The presence of a murmur should warrant further exploration of signs or symptoms of cardiac disease, particularly fainting, discoloration such as blue lips, or failure to thrive. Furthermore, the <strong><em>abdominal examination</em></strong> may reveal a large or very small liver, which correlates with volume status as well as the ability for the heart to handle preload.</p>
<p class="indent"><strong><em>Pulmonary examination</em></strong> focuses on determining the presence of abnormal air movement, including absent breath sounds, wheezing, or coarse breath sounds. It can often be challenging to differentiate coarse lung sounds from transmitted upper airway sounds in the presence of nasal congestion. The abdominal examination evaluates for signs of trauma, distention, or discomfort. Furthermore, umbilical hernias may be appreciated. The extremities should be assessed for range of motion, contractures, or deformities as well as possible sites for intravenous access. There should be a discussion with the patient and guardians regarding the risks and benefits of delivering general versus regional anesthesia to the child. The risks of anesthesia that are specific to pediatrics include, in particular, respiratory depression, particularly in ex-premature infants, respiratory complications, such as bronchospasm and laryngospasm, hypoxia, and aspiration pneumonia.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Adolescents may be in a position where they can provide assent to a procedure, but ultimately the legal guardian must provide consent.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen567">B. Fasting Guidelines</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The American Society of Anesthesiologists recommends that infants and children fast preoperatively to reduce the risk of pulmonary aspiration; however, fasting times for children are frequently much longer than these guidelines<sup><a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib20">20</a>,<a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib21">21</a></sup> (<strong><a href="#tt33-5">Table 33.5</a></strong>). Prolonged fasting in children can increase irritability and lead to adverse physiologic and metabolic effects.<sup><a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib22">22</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">The emphasis in pediatric preoperative fasting has therefore shifted to encouraging drinking, particularly of clear fluids, during the allowable period. Professional societies throughout the world including the European Society for Pediatric Anesthesia have also reduced clear fluid fasting times to 1 hour prior to elective procedures, unless clinically contraindicated.<sup><a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib23">23</a></sup></p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen568">C. Preoperative Anxiolysis</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Children as young as 10&#x00A0;months of age may experience anxiety when transferring to the operating room, with the toddler to preschool range (aged 1-7 years) being the highest risk population. Strategies to mitigate anxiety include premedication, parental presence, and virtual reality techniques.</p>
<p class="indent"><strong><em>Oral premedication</em></strong> with a benzodiazepine (eg, midazolam 0.5&#x00A0;mg/kg up to 10&#x00A0;mg) is effective preoperatively due to a rapid onset (5-15 minutes) and a short duration of action.<sup><a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib24">24</a></sup> Intranasal or oral dexmedetomidine (1&#x00B5;g/mg) has an onset of 30 to 45 minutes but, with adequate time, can provide excellent separation from parents.<sup><a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib25">25</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent"><strong><em>Parental presence</em></strong> during induction of anesthesia eliminates the stress caused by separation. This approach is most effective when parents are calm and adequately prepared as to what to expect.<sup><a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib25">25</a></sup></p>
<h6 class="h6">1. Technology for Anxiety Reduction</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Technological advances over the last two decades have had an important impact on the nonpharmacologic strategies available to facilitate anxiolysis in the perioperative setting. Smartphones and tablets can be used to provide distractions in a number of ways such as playing music, watching a favorite video, playing games, or even interacting with parents via video call during transport and induction of anesthesia. Virtual reality systems are becoming increasingly available and show promise in a variety of pediatric settings including distraction during intravenous line placement and even invasive procedures like upper endoscopies.<sup><a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib26">26</a>,<a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib27">27</a></sup></p>
<a id="page710"></a>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt33-5"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;33.5</span> Preprocedure Fasting Guidelines</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:50%;"></col>
<col style="width:50%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Ingested Material</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Fasting Time (h)</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Clear liquid</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">2</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Breast milk</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">4</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Infant formula</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">6</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Solids/nonhuman milk</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">6+<sup>a</sup></p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot"><sup>a</sup>Amount and type of food must be considered.</p>
<p class="u_tfoot">Adapted from American Society of Anesthesiologists Practice guidelines for preoperative fasting and the use of pharmacologic agents to reduce the risk of pulmonary aspiration: an updated report. <em>Anesthesiology.</em> 2017;126(3):376-393.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen569">D. Induction of Anesthesia</h5>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><em>Induction of anesthesia</em></strong> represents a stressful event for children (and parents!). Beyond the mandatory goals of maintaining a patent airway and stable hemodynamics, the goals of a pediatric induction also include a smooth separation from the parent (if a parent is not present for induction) and a cooperative child during the process of induction, while establishing and meeting parental expectations during the process. Two of the most commonly used approaches for minimizing the stress of induction (which may be used alone or in combination) are discussed in the sections that follow.<sup><a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib1">1</a>,<a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib2">2</a></sup></p>
<h6 class="h6">1. Inhalation Induction of Anesthesia</h6>
<p class="nonindent">In the absence of contraindications, an <strong><em>inhaled induction</em></strong> of anesthesia has a number of advantages in children. It is painless and it is successful on the first attempt (whereas intravenous cannulation has an inherent failure rate). In the United States, inhalation inductions are performed almost exclusively with sevoflurane, as the availability of halothane is severely limited. In cooperative patients, 50% to 70% nitrous oxide in oxygen may be delivered first (which is odorless), titrating sevoflurane up to 8%. This may allow the child to both tolerate and not remember the less pleasant volatile agent. Because inhaled inductions are performed in children prior to securing vascular access and there is the potential for laryngospasm and bradycardia, succinylcholine (4&#x00A0;mg/kg) and atropine (0.02&#x00A0;mg/kg) should be immediately available for intramuscular administration. Caution is advised for inhalation induction for children with medical conditions (ie, trisomy 21 or Down syndrome) who may develop bradycardia from high sevoflurane concentrations.</p>
<h6 class="h6">2. Intravenous Induction</h6>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><em>Intravenous induction</em></strong> is typically preferred in children who have established venous access. For children coming for elective surgery, some centers routinely place an intravenous line for induction of anesthesia. Premedication with a benzodiazepine and application of topical local anesthetic cream can minimize the stress of intravenous line placement.</p>
<a id="page711"></a>
<h6 class="h6">3. Intramuscular Induction</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Occasionally, a patient may not be able to cooperate with any element of preoperative preparation (eg, autistic children) or induction of anesthesia (including taking oral premedication). <strong><em>Intramuscular injection</em></strong> of ketamine (3-5&#x00A0;mg/kg) may be the best option in these circumstances, but this requires a careful team approach and family preparation to be safe and successful.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen570">E. Pediatric Airway Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Understanding the anatomical and physiologic differences between adults, infants, and children is necessary to provide safe and successful airway management tailored to the infant or child. In general, these differences and their impact on <strong><em>airway management</em></strong> are greatest in the neonatal and infant period. Multiple laryngoscopy attempts can lead to an increase in morbidity and mortality in children and, particularly, so for children with known or anticipated difficult airways.<sup><a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib28">28</a>,<a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib29">29</a></sup> Passive oxygen delivery during intubation attempts may increase the time before desaturation and provide laryngoscopists with valuable time to secure the airway.<sup><a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib30">30</a>,<a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib31">31</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Anatomically, an infant has a larger occiput, a larger tongue size relative to the size of the oropharynx, and a more cephalad larynx (<strong><a href="#tt33-6">Table 33.6</a></strong>). The larger occiput may promote airway obstruction and interfere with laryngoscopy when a head pillow is used to achieve the classic sniffing position. Instead, a shoulder roll is often more useful both for promoting a patent airway and for facilitating direct laryngoscopy. Although it was originally postulated that the narrowest portion of the pediatric airway is at the level of the cricoid ring, newer magnetic resonance imaging&#x2013;based research suggests the glottic opening and the immediate subvocal cord level are the narrowest.<sup><a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib32">32</a></sup> Furthermore, the shape of the larynx is cylindrical, as in the adult, so it is important to remember clinically because the endotracheal tube fit (resistance to endotracheal tube passage) must be assessed after it has passed through the vocal cords. Tightly fitting tubes may cause clinical problems such as <strong><em>postextubation stridor</em></strong> and postextubation croup. A leak pressure of less than 20 to 25&#x00A0;cm&#x00A0;H<sub>2</sub>O should be targeted to minimize this risk.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Infants and young children have a relatively large tongue and a more cephalad larynx effectively shortening the distance in which the oral, pharyngeal, and tracheal axes must be aligned to achieve laryngeal exposure during direct laryngoscopy.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">Normal healthy infants have overlap with tidal breathing and closing volumes, and their oxygen consumption rates are nearly three times that of an adult; so under anesthetized conditions, their FRC is reduced (<strong><a href="ch033-sec01.xhtml#tt33-2">Table 33.2</a></strong>). The clinical impact of this is rapid oxyhemoglobin desaturation following brief periods of apnea, resulting in shorter times to perform apneic intubation techniques. Additionally, oxyhemoglobin desaturation will rapidly occur when ventilation is compromised (eg, coughing, airway obstruction). <strong><em>Difficult airway management</em></strong> in pediatric patients often requires deep sedation or general anesthesia.</p>
<h6 class="h6">1. Anesthetic Conditions for Laryngoscopy and Endotracheal Intubation</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Traditionally, intubation of the trachea in children can result in activation of the airway in the form of laryngospasm and/or bronchospasm. Adequate depth of anesthesia prior to laryngoscopy and endotracheal intubation is essential. This can be done with deep sevoflurane anesthesia alone, but it is also often performed with a propofol bolus (eg, 2&#x00A0;mg/kg) or a fast-acting opioid (eg, remifentanil or fentanyl 2&#x00A0;&#x03BC;g/kg) following inhalational induction of anesthesia with sevoflurane. Insufficient depth of anesthesia without neuromuscular blockade may result in coughing, laryngospasm, oxyhemoglobin desaturation, and regurgitation. Garcia-Marcinkiewicz et al report that neuromuscular blockade may reduce the risk of airway complications due to laryngospasm in pediatric patients with difficult airway.<sup><a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib33">33</a></sup></p>
<a id="page712"></a>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt33-6"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;33.6</span> Anatomic Differences Between Infant and Adult Airways</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:33%;"></col>
<col style="width:33%;"></col>
<col style="width:34%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Anatomic Relationship</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Pediatric</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Adult</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Occiput</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Large</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Normal</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Tongue</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Large</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Normal</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Epiglottis</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Relatively longer, narrower, and stiffer</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Firm</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Epiglottis shape</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Omega shaped</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Flat, broad</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Relative larynx location</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Cephalad</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Caudal</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Larynx size/shape</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Proportionately smaller/cylindrical</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Cylindrical</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Glottic level</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">C3-C4</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">C5-C6</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Narrowest point</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Vocal cords</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Vocal cords</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Vocal cords</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Inclined posterior to anterior</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Perpendicular to larynx</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Mucosa</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">More vulnerable to trauma</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Less vulnerable to trauma</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">Data from Lerman J. Pediatric anesthesia. In: Barash PG, Cullen B, Stoelting RK, et al, eds. <em>Clinical Anesthesia</em>. 7th ed. Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott Williams &#x0026; Wilkins; 2013:1216-1256, and Litman RS, Weissend EE, Shibata D, et al. Developmental changes of laryngeal dimensions in unparalyzed, sedated children. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2003;98:41-45, with permission.</p>
</div>
<p class="h7"><strong><em>Succinylcholine</em></strong></p>
<p class="nonindent">In the early 1990s, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration applied a black box warning for succinylcholine contraindicating its use for routine airway management. However, in the absence of absolute contraindications (malignant hyperthermia susceptibility, history of burns, etc.), succinylcholine is acceptable in scenarios such as laryngospasm and rapid sequence induction and intubation and may be the preferred agent.</p>
<p class="h7"><strong><em>Reversal of Neuromuscular Blockade</em></strong></p>
<p class="nonindent">Sugammadex is a selective muscle relaxant binding molecule designed for the acute reversal of neuromuscular blockade by rocuronium or vecuronium. It exhibits strong binding to rocuronium, and vecuronium to a lesser degree.<sup><a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib34">34</a></sup> It&#x00A0;is not effective for reversal of pancuronium or other pharmacological classes of neuromuscular blocking agents such as cisatracurium.<sup><a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib34">34</a></sup> Although it was approved for use in the European Union in 2008 and the United States in 2015, the evidence for pediatric use remains sparse, particularly for children younger than 2&#x00A0;years.<sup><a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib35">35</a>,<a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib36">36</a></sup> Specific concerns for pediatric care relate to the efficacy of acute reversal of rocuronium, the potential for deposition in bones and growth plates, and the interaction with oral contraceptives for postpubertal girls and adolescents.</p>
<h6 class="h6">2. Direct Laryngoscopy</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Traditionally, the <strong><em>straight blade (Miller)</em></strong> has been used in children, although there is little or no comparative evidence to show that this blade performs better than the <strong><em>curved blade (Macintosh)</em></strong> (<a href="ch020.xhtml">Chapter 20</a>, <a href="ch020-sec03.xhtml#ff20-5">Figure 20.5</a>). After sweeping the tongue, the blade tip is advanced beyond the vallecula and the epiglottis is directly lifted. Alternatively, the straight blade can be used in the <a id="page713"></a>manner of the Macintosh and the epiglottis lifted indirectly with the blade tip in the vallecula.</p>
<h6 class="h6">3. Laryngeal Masks and Supraglottic Airways</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Laryngeal mask airways are frequently used in pediatric anesthesia. In general, the indications and contraindications are similar to adults. Laryngeal masks with gastric drain channels as well as laryngeal masks designed to facilitate intubation are available in pediatric sizes.</p>
<h6 class="h6">4. Endotracheal Tube Selection</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Historically, <strong><em>uncuffed endotracheal tubes</em></strong> were recommended in children; however, in the current era, cuffed tubes are in most circumstances superior. The incidence of postintubation stridor is less when properly sized cuffed tubes are used, possibly from the decreased need or frequency of repeated laryngoscopy for tube change when too large a tube is placed initially. <strong><em>Cuffed endotracheal tubes</em></strong> also offer advantages of improved sealing of the trachea, which decreases operating room pollution, allows for lower fresh gas flows, improves ventilator performance, and may offer greater protection from macroaspiration. Although cuffed tubes can be safely used and often preferred for surgical procedures in neonates and preterm infants, uncuffed tubes are commonly used for long-term ventilation in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU). When tracheal intubation is performed, the correct tracheal tube size must be chosen. Most commonly, the modified <strong><em>Cole formula</em></strong> is used for uncuffed endotracheal tubes, where the predicted tube size is 4 plus the age divided by 4. In infants and smaller children, a half-size smaller should be selected when a cuffed tube is used. For example, for a 4-year-old child, one would select a (4&#x00A0;+&#x00A0;4/4&#x00A0;=&#x00A0;5) 5.0 uncuffed endotracheal tube or a (4&#x00A0;+&#x00A0;4/4 &#x2212; 0.5&#x00A0;=&#x00A0;4.5) 4.5 cuffed endotracheal tube.</p>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>5. Tracheal Intubation and Positioning of the Endotracheal Tube</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">Indications for tracheal intubation in children are largely similar to those for adults. In addition, many anesthesiologists intubate the trachea and control ventilation in neonates and preterm infants in the absence of other traditional indications. Careful attention must be paid to positioning the tracheal tube tip in the midtrachea. Small tube movements may result in endobronchial intubation or inadvertent extubation in infants. Assessing the adequate depth of the endotracheal tube can be performed by deliberately advancing the endotracheal tube into the main stem bronchus while simultaneously auscultating and providing breaths with hand bag ventilation. When the endotracheal tube enters the right or left main stem bronchus, breath sounds will be absent in the opposite side. The tube is then withdrawn by 1 cm in infants and 2 cm in older children to achieve a mid-tracheal position, and breath sounds should be used to confirm both lungs are being ventilated. When a cuffed tube is used, it may be easier and more reliable to position the tube so that the cuff can be palpated by ballottement in the suprasternal notch. This translates to the tip of the tube being in an intrathoracic and midtracheal location.</p>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>6. Rapid Sequence Induction and Intubation in Pediatrics</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">One of the clinical manifestations of the high oxygen consumption rate and reduced FRC of an infant under anesthesia is rapid oxyhemoglobin desaturation following apnea. If a &#x201C;traditional&#x201D; <strong><em>rapid sequence induction</em></strong> is performed, nearly all infants will have an oxyhemoglobin saturation below 90% <a id="page714"></a>after 1 minute of apnea. Therefore, many pediatric anesthesiologists perform a modified rapid sequence induction with gentle positive pressure ventilation in addition to cricoid pressure prior to intubation because oxygen delivery is prioritized over aspiration risk from a risk-benefit standpoint.<sup><a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib24">24</a></sup></p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>