<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec239">VI. Aortic Aneurysms</h4>
<p class="nonindent">The management of patients with aortic aneurysms is evolving rapidly with innovative stenting techniques progressively replacing open surgical procedures. However, <strong><em>rupture</em></strong> of an aortic aneurysm is a <strong><em>true surgical emergency</em></strong> and one of the greatest anesthetic management challenges.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen673">A. Epidemiology and Pathophysiology of Abdominal Aortic Aneurysms</h5>
<p class="nonindent">There are approximately 200,000 AAAs diagnosed annually. Approximately 45,000 of these require surgical repair annually. Risk factors for AAA include male sex, advanced age, smoking, hypertension, low serum high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, high fibrinogen plasma levels, and low platelet count. The annual risk of aneurysmal rupture is directly related to its diameter: 1% for aneurysms measuring &#x003C;4.0&#x00A0;cm, 2% for aneurysms 4.0 to 4.9&#x00A0;cm, and 20% for aneurysms &#x003E;5.0&#x00A0;cm. All aneurysms &#x003E;5.0&#x00A0;cm should be considered for surgical <a id="page792"></a>or endovascular repair. Screening is recommended by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force for men older 65&#x00A0;years with a smoking history.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen674">B. Medical Management Versus Endovascular Repair Versus Open Surgical Repair</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Medical management of aortic aneurysms includes smoking cessation and control of hypertension, dyslipidemia, diabetes, and diet. Medical management may slow, but will not halt aneurysm progression completely. For patients with AAAs measuring 4.0 to 5.4&#x00A0;cm, frequent ultrasound monitoring for progression is vital. Since the 1980s, <strong><em>endovascular aneurysm repair</em></strong> (EVAR) has progressively become the <strong><em>dominant</em></strong> treatment modality. In this approach, the femoral artery is used to introduce stent graft(s) inside the aneurysm, thereby preventing further enlargement or rupture. Initially, EVAR was used on patients deemed too high risk for an open surgical repair, but now it has evolved into a first-line treatment choice. Nevertheless, EVAR is not without complications, including <strong><em>graft leak</em></strong> and intraoperative conversion to open repair because of aneurysm rupture, vascular injury, or inability to seal the graft against the wall of the aorta. When compared with open surgical repair, EVAR is associated with shorter recover times and lower 30-day mortality rates (1.4% vs 4.2%). While EVAR offers an early advantage, long-term follow-up data show that overall survival is similar among patients undergoing open and endovascular techniques. However, even with the advent of technologically improved grafts, the rate of reintervention is higher with EVAR, and durability remains a question. Graft costs and reoperation expenses offset other savings, so that ultimately there is no cost benefit to EVAR verses open surgical repair. EVAR is performed using local, regional, or general anesthesia depending on the preferences of the patient and the surgical team.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen675">C. Open Surgical Repair</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Open surgical repair of an AAA is performed through either an anterior transperitoneal laparotomy incision or an anterolateral retroperitoneal approach. The surgical exposure for either approach is virtually identical, but the retroperitoneal approach is associated with less fluid shifts, faster return of bowel function, lower pulmonary complications, and shorter intensive care unit stays. After administration of intravenous heparin, the aortic cross-clamp is applied to the supraceliac, suprarenal, or infrarenal aorta, depending on the location of the aneurysm. The higher the <strong><em>level of cross-clamping</em></strong>, the greater the stress will be on the left ventricle and the higher the incidence of ischemic injury to the gut, kidney, and spinal cord. Intraoperative blood loss during open AAA repair can be significant, and the extensive retroperitoneal surgical dissection increases fluid requirements (up to 10-12&#x00A0;mL/kg/h). In addition to standard ASA monitors, continuous direct arterial blood pressure monitoring is highly recommended because of the rapid and marked changes in blood pressure during the clamping and unclamping of the aorta. Central venous and pulmonary artery pressure monitoring as well as transesophageal echocardiography are often used depending on the comorbidities of the patient and preferences of the anesthesiologist. General anesthesia or combined general and epidural anesthesia are common approaches. The combined approach has the advantage of providing excellent postoperative analgesia but introduces the risk of epidural hematoma because systemic anticoagulation must be used during surgery.</p>
<p class="video"><video data-id="LF5h0xLz" controls="controls" class="jwp-video" crossorigin="anonymous" style="width:100%; height:auto; width:320px; height:240px;">Browser issues</video></p>
<p class="video1" id="vid37-2"><strong>VIDEO 37.2</strong></p>
<p class="video2"><strong>Aortic Cross-Clamping: Blood Volume Redistribution</strong></p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen676">D. Thoracoabdominal Aneurysm Repair</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm surgery is one of the <strong><em>greatest anesthetic management challenges</em></strong>. Typically, thoracoabdominal aneurysms involve the <a id="page793"></a>descending thoracic and abdominal aorta and require an expansive incision extending into these cavities, one-lung ventilation, and the use of partial cardiopulmonary bypass. Selective (&#x201C;one-lung&#x201D;) ventilation of the contralateral lung is required for optimizing surgical exposure and to prevent the ipsilateral lung from surgical trauma. During thoracic aortic procedures, <strong><em>spinal cord ischemia</em></strong> may be detected through the use of somatosensory-evoked potential and motor-evoked potentials (<strong><a href="#tt37-2">Table 37.2</a></strong>). To improve spinal cord perfusion pressure, a <strong><em>lumbar subarachnoid drain</em></strong> can be used to remove cerebrospinal fluid. Partial cardiopulmonary bypass has been used to provide perfusion distal to the operative site. In fact, the incidence of neurologic injury in this setting has been substantially reduced when distal aortic perfusion is combined with drainage of cerebrospinal fluid. Many of the other anesthetic management considerations are the same for thoracoabdominal as noted above for AAA surgery. (See the sections in <a href="ch036.xhtml">Chapter 36</a> on &#x201C;Aortic Dissection&#x201D; and &#x201C;Aortic Aneurysm&#x201D; and Table 36.2 for a summary of the common hemodynamic goals for all these procedures.)</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Approximately 30 to 40 million people in the United States have peripheral arterial disease.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen677">E. Management of Emergency Aortic Surgery</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Rupture or leaking of an aortic aneurysm is the most common reason for emergency aortic surgery. Aortic aneurysm rupture has a mortality rate of 85% <a id="page794"></a>unless surgery is performed immediately, and even then the <strong><em>mortality rate is 50%</em></strong>. If the patient survives emergency surgery, the incidence of renal impairment, pulmonary injury, MI, and spinal cord injury is significantly greater than in elective aortic surgery. Ruptures most commonly occur into the retroperitoneum, and this site allows temporary tamponade of the hemorrhage. About 25% of aneurysms rupture into the peritoneal cavity, and rapid exsanguination occurs. Massive blood loss will occur during this surgery, and, therefore, preparations for blood replacement, including rapid infusion devices, are critical. For this true surgical emergency, both EVAR and open surgical repair are used in different centers depending on the resources and expertise available.<sup><a href="ch037-sec07.xhtml#bib6">6</a></sup></p>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt37-2"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;37.2</span> Methods of Spinal Cord Protection During Descending Thoracic Aortic Surgery</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:45%;"></col>
<col style="width:55%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Limitation of cross-clamp duration</p></td>
<td class="td3">&#x00A0;</td></tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Distal circulatory support (partial bypass)</p></td>
<td class="td2">&#x00A0;</td></tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Reattachment of critical intercostal arteries</p></td>
<td class="td3">&#x00A0;</td></tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">CSF drainage (lumbar drain)</p></td>
<td class="td2">&#x00A0;</td></tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Hypothermia</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Moderate systemic (32&#x00B0;C-34&#x00B0;C)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Epidural cooling</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Circulatory arrest</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Maintenance of proximal blood pressure</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Pharmacotherapy: Corticosteroids, barbiturates, naloxone, calcium channel blockers, oxygen-free radical scavengers, NMDA antagonists, mannitol, magnesium, vasodilators (adenosine, papaverine, prostacyclin), perfluorocarbons, colchicine</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Intrathecal: Papaverine, magnesium, tetracaine, perfluorocarbons</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Avoidance of postoperative hypotension</p></td>
<td class="td3">&#x00A0;</td></tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Sequential aortic clamping</p></td>
<td class="td2">&#x00A0;</td></tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Enhanced monitoring for spinal cord ischemia</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Somatosensory-evoked potentials</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Motor-evoked potentials</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Hydrogen-saturated saline</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Avoidance of hyperglycemia</p></td>
<td class="td2">&#x00A0;</td></tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; NMDA, <em>N</em>-methyl-<span class="small">D</span>-aspartate.</p>
<p class="u_tfoot">Derived from Thomas DM, Hulten EA, Ellis ST, et al. Open versus endovascular repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm in the elective and emergent setting in a pooled population of 37,781 patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. <em>ISRN Cardiol</em>. 2014;2014:149243.</p>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>