<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<section epub:type="chapter">
<div id="main_container">
<header>
<h1 id="c01" class="chapter_name"><span class="chapter_name"><a id="page797"></a>38</span></h1>
<h2 class="chapter_title">Management of Acute and Chronic Pain</h2>
<p class="author">Dost Khan, Yogen Girish Asher, and Honorio T. Benzon</p>
</header>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><em>Pain</em></strong> is defined by the International Association for the Study of Pain (IASP) as &#x201C;an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associated with actual or potential tissue damage, or described in terms of such damage.&#x201D;<sup><a href="ch038-sec05.xhtml#bib1">1</a></sup> <strong><em>Acute pain</em></strong> is a normal physiologic response to injury, disease, or surgery and is usually temporally self-limited. Though unpleasant, pain is protective and serves the purpose of avoiding, stopping, or minimizing tissue damage and should be seen as a symptom of an underlying disease. <strong><em>Chronic pain</em></strong> is usually defined as pain lasting more than 3&#x00A0;months. It can be due to ongoing disease or tissue injury or can persist after resolution of or in the absence of injury. Chronic pain is associated with neuroplastic changes in the central and peripheral nervous systems that may manifest as hypersensitivity, windup, and allodynia. When these changes occur, the pain itself can be called a disease state.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">When chronic pain is associated with neuroplastic changes in the central and peripheral nervous systems that may manifest as hypersensitivity, windup, and allodynia, the pain itself becomes a disease state.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent"><strong><em>Nociceptive pain</em></strong> results from transmission of a noxious stimulus through an intact nervous system. Nociceptive pain can be worsened by inflammation, which causes <strong><em>hyperalgesia,</em></strong> the phenomenon of normally painful stimuli being perceived as more painful than usual. Nociceptive pain can be somatic or visceral. <strong><em>Somatic pain</em></strong> originates within the skin, superficial tissue, and musculoskeletal system and is typically easy to localize and described as sharp. <strong><em>Visceral pain</em></strong> is typically vague, diffuse, and achy and may refer to surrounding areas.</p>
<p class="indent">In contrast to nociceptive pain, <strong><em>neuropathic pain</em></strong> results from a lesion in the central or peripheral nervous system. It is often described as electric or lancinating in character. If found in the distribution of a known nerve, it is termed <strong><em>neuralgia.</em></strong> Neuropathic pain is often associated with altered sensations. <strong><em>Paresthesias</em></strong> are abnormal, spontaneous, or evoked sensations. <strong><em>Dysesthesia</em></strong> are unpleasant abnormal sensations. <strong><em>Allodynia</em></strong> is the perception of pain from a normally nonpainful stimulus (such as light touch). <strong><em>Hyperesthesia</em></strong> is increased sensitivity to stimulation, and <strong><em>hypoesthesia</em></strong> is decreased sensation of stimulus.</p>
</div>
</section>
</body>
</html>