<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec213">VI. Fluid and Blood Management</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen571">A. Intravenous Fluid Requirements</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Intravenous fluid requirements in fasting children are usually determined using the <strong><em>4-2-1 rule</em></strong>. The hourly infusion rate is calculated as 4&#x00A0;mL/kg for the first 10&#x00A0;kg, plus 2&#x00A0;mL/kg for the second 10&#x00A0;kg, and 1&#x00A0;mL/kg for each additional kilogram. Fasting fluid deficits are calculated based on this formula and the duration the child has been nil per os. These are replaced intraoperatively in a manner similar to adults. The generally accepted guideline is 50% of the deficit replaced in the first hour, followed by 25% of the deficit replaced in each of hours 2 and 3 to complete the entire deficit.</p>
<p class="indent">Infants under 6&#x00A0;months of age, and neonates in particular, are at increased risk of hypoglycemia with fasting durations commonly seen in anesthetic practice. Liberalized fasting guidelines (eg, clear liquids until 2 hours prior to surgery) may help prevent hypoglycemia and improve patient comfort.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Hypovolemia associated with hemorrhage is the most common cardiovascular cause of perioperative cardiac arrest in children.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen572">B. Blood Loss Replacement and Transfusion</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Underestimation of blood loss, inadequate preparation (vascular access, blood preparation), and massive hemorrhage are identified as contributors to <strong><em>cardiac arrest</em></strong> in the pediatric patient.<sup><a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib37">37</a>,<a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib38">38</a></sup> Blood loss is replaced with crystalloids (without glucose). Although transfusion thresholds are ultimately tailored to the individual patient and clinical scenario, in most scenarios, red blood cell transfusion is indicated when the hemoglobin is below 7&#x00A0;g/dL and is often indicated sooner depending on the age of the patient and clinical scenario.<sup><a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib37">37</a>-<a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib39">39</a></sup> Packed red blood cells (5&#x00A0;mL/kg) can be expected to raise the hemoglobin approximately 1&#x00A0;g/dL. Indications for hemostatic blood component therapy are similar to those for adults. Suggested dosing for blood components are presented in <strong><a href="#tt33-7">Table 33.7</a></strong>.</p>
<a id="page715"></a>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt33-7"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;33.7</span> Pediatric Blood Component Administration</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:10%;"></col>
<col style="width:15%;"></col>
<col style="width:75%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Component</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Dosing Guideline</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Comments</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">PRBCs</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">5-10&#x00A0;mL/kg</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Expected hemoglobin increase of 1-1.5&#x00A0;g/dL for every 5&#x00A0;mL/kg.</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Infants/small children at risk of hyperkalemia with rapid infusion of PRBCs that have been stored for a prolonged time. Consider fresh/washed PRBCs when anticipated.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">FFP</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">10-15&#x00A0;mL/kg</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">During massive hemorrhage dilutional coagulopathy of soluble clotting factors develops after &#x003E;1 blood volume of loss; FFP treatment recommended.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Platelets</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">10-15&#x00A0;mL/kg</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Usually indicated for platelet counts &#x003C;50,000/&#x03BC;L; higher thresholds may be used for certain procedures (eg, neurosurgery).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Cryoprecipitate</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">0.1 U/kg</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Indicated for fibrinogen levels &#x003C;80-100&#x00A0;mg/dL.</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">FFP, fresh frozen plasma; PRBC, packed red blood cells.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen573">C. Regional Anesthesia</h5>
<p class="nonindent">There are many useful applications for <strong><em>regional anesthetic</em></strong> techniques in pediatrics.<sup><a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib40">40</a>,<a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib41">41</a></sup> Caudal injections are among the most common procedures performed in pediatric anesthesia. Conversely, there are rare scenarios that may require spinal anesthesia in infants, such as the evaluation of a child for a congenital myopathy that may be associated with malignant hyperthermia. In such cases, a spinal anesthetic provides adequate conditions for a muscle biopsy of the thigh without exposure to triggering agents. Epidural catheters may be threaded to various levels via a caudal approach. Furthermore, peripheral nerve blocks may be helpful for a variety of orthopedic procedures, ranging from osteotomies to arthroscopic procedures for tendon repairs. Ultrasound imaging provides visualization of nerves, anatomic landmarks, and the needle and spread of local anesthetic, which allows for safe and effective administration of regional anesthesia. Other chapters of this book discuss epidural or regional anesthesia blocks.</p>
<p class="indent">Prior to administration of caudal anesthesia, informed consent should be obtained from the patient&#x2019;s parent or legal guardian. Physical examination should note the presence of any sacral dimples, which may be associated with occult spina bifida or tethered cord, thus increasing the risk of neurologic complications from the administration of local anesthetics via the caudal approach. The surface landmarks that should be palpated include the sacral cornua as well as the coccyx. The sacral hiatus and sacrococcygeal ligament are located inferior to the cornua. The block can be safely performed with either bupivacaine 0.25% with epinephrine (limit 1&#x00A0;mL/kg) or ropivacaine 0.2% (limit 1&#x00A0;mL/kg).<sup><a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib40">40</a></sup> A test dose should consist of epinephrine 5&#x00A0;&#x03BC;g/kg. Criteria for identifying an intravascular injection include an increase in 10 beats per minute in heart rate as positive, recognizing that heart rate changes can be delayed by as much as a minute after administration of the test dose.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>