<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/jquery.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
<!--<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-1.10.2.min.js'></script>-->
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-migrate-1.2.1.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery.qtip.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/etext.js'></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec216">IX. Outpatient Procedures or Ambulatory Surgery</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen590">A. Indications and Contraindications</h5>
<p class="nonindent">In general, children presenting for outpatient procedures require being in optimal health and having no ongoing cardiorespiratory processes such as upper respiratory infections.<sup><a href="#bib1">1</a>,<a href="#bib2">2</a></sup> <a id="page724"></a>Furthermore, the procedure must be amenable to pain control with medications administered by mouth. Although it is not necessary to demonstrate that a child is able to eat prior to discharge, the child should be willing and able to drink fluids and ensure he or she can take the necessary medications as indicated. Additional elements to consider for eligibility for outpatient surgery include the care environment at home as well as the distance to travel home. For example, it may not be prudent to discharge a child from the hospital in the evening if the family has to drive several hours to get home.</p>
<p class="indent">There is a clear contraindication to ambulatory surgery in ex-premature infants during the first months of life due to the risk of postoperative apnea. The recommendation applies to premature infants defined as postgestational age of 37&#x00A0;weeks or less. There is an absolute cutoff at 52&#x00A0;weeks of postconceptual age where children must be admitted for overnight observation. Premature infants between 52 and 60&#x00A0;weeks postconceptual age may be observed in the postanesthesia care unit, and the decision to discharge the child can be left to the discretion of the providers caring for the child.</p>
<p class="BIBLIOGRAPHYpTitle">References</p>
<ol class="ref"><li id="bib1">Long JB, Suresh S. Neonatal anesthesia. In: Barash PG, Cahalan MK, Cullen BF, et al, eds. <em>Clinical Anesthesia</em>. 8th ed. Wolters Kluwer; 2018:1178-1218.</li>
<li id="bib2">Barash PG, Cullen BF, Stoelting RK, et al. <em>Clinical Anesthesia</em>. [eBook Without Multimedia]. 8th ed. Wolters Kluwer; 2018.</li>
<li id="bib3">Healy F, Hanna BD, Zinman R. Clinical practice: the impact of lung disease on the heart and cardiac disease on the lungs. <em>Eur J Pediatr</em>. 2010;169(1):1. PMID: 19639339.</li>
<li id="bib4">Alcorn J, McNamara PJ. Pharmacokinetics in the newborn. <em>Adv Drug Deliv Rev</em>. 2003;55(5):667-686. PMID: 12706549.</li>
<li id="bib5">Tierney AL, Nelson CA III. Brain development and the role of experience in the early years. <em>Zero Three</em>. 2009;30(2):9. PMID: 23894221.</li>
<li id="bib6">Jevtovic-Todorovic V. Exposure of developing brain to general anesthesia: what is the animal evidence? <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2018;128(4):832-839. PMID: 29271804.</li>
<li id="bib7">Lin EP, Lee J-R, Lee CS, Deng M, Loepke AW. Do anesthetics harm the developing human brain? An integrative analysis of animal and human studies. <em>Neurotoxicol Teratol</em>. 2017;60:117-128. PMID: 27793659.</li>
<li id="bib8">Jevtovic-Todorovic V, Hartman RE, Izumi Y, et al. Early exposure to common anesthetic agents causes widespread neurodegeneration in the developing rat brain and persistent learning deficits. <em>J Neurosci</em>. 2003;23(3):876-882.</li>
<li id="bib9">Vutskits L, Davidson A. Update on developmental anesthesia neurotoxicity. <em>Current Opin Anesthesiol</em>. 2017;30(3):337-342.</li>
<li id="bib10">O&#x2019;Leary JD, Janus M, Duku E, et al. A population-based study evaluating the association between surgery in early life and child development at primary school entry. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2016;125(2):272-279. PMID: 27433745.</li>
<li id="bib11">Hu D, Flick RP, Zaccariello MJ, et al. Association between exposure of young children to procedures requiring general anesthesia and learning and behavioral outcomes in a population-based birth cohort. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2017;127(2):227. PMID: 28609302.</li>
<li id="bib12">Glatz P, Sandin RH, Pedersen NL, Bonamy A-K, Eriksson LI, Granath F. Association of anesthesia and surgery during childhood with long-term academic performance. <em>JAMA Pediatr</em>. 2017;171(1):e163470. PMID: 27820621.</li>
<li id="bib13">Graham MR, Brownell M, Chateau DG, Dragan RD, Burchill C, Fransoo RR. Neurodevelopmental assessment in kindergarten in children exposed to general anesthesia before the age of 4 years: A retrospective matched cohort study. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2016;125(4):667-677. PMID: 276655179.</li>
<li id="bib14"><a id="page725"></a>United States Food and Drug Administration. <em>FDA Drug Safety Communication: FDA Approves Label Changes for Use of General Anesthetic and Sedation Drugs in Young Children</em>. US Food and Drug Administration, Drug Safety Communication; 2017.</li>
<li id="bib15">McCann ME, De Graaff JC, Dorris L, et al. Neurodevelopmental outcome at 5 years of age after general anaesthesia or awake-regional anaesthesia in infancy (GAS): an international, multicentre, randomised, controlled equivalence trial. <em>Lancet</em>. 2019;393(10172):664-677. PMID: 30782342.</li>
<li id="bib16">Sun LS, Li G, Miller TL, et al. Association between a single general anesthesia exposure before age 36 months and neurocognitive outcomes in later childhood. <em>J Am Med Assoc</em>. 2016;315(21):2312-2320. PMID: 27272582.</li>
<li id="bib17">Vutskits L, Culley DJ. GAS, PANDA, and MASK no evidence of clinical anesthetic neurotoxicity! <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2019;131(4):762-764. PMID: 31246606.</li>
<li id="bib18">Warner DO, Zaccariello MJ, Katusic SK, et al. Neuropsychological and behavioral outcomes after exposure of young children to procedures requiring general anesthesia: the MASK study. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2018;129(1):89. PMID: 29672337.</li>
<li id="bib19">von Ungern-Sternberg BS, Boda K, Chambers NA, et al. Risk assessment for respiratory complications in paediatric anaesthesia: a prospective cohort study. <em>Lancet</em>. 2010;376(9743):773-783. PMID: 20816545.</li>
<li id="bib20">American Society of Anesthesiologists Practice guidelines for preoperative fasting and the use of pharmacologic agents to reduce the risk of pulmonary aspiration: an updated report. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2017;126(3):376-393. PMID: 28045707.</li>
<li id="bib21">Engelhardt T, Wilson G, Horne L, Weiss M, Schmitz A. Are you hungry? Are you thirsty?&#x2013;fasting times in elective outpatient pediatric patients. <em>Pediatr Anesth</em>. 2011;21(9):964-968. PMID: 21489044.</li>
<li id="bib22">Dennhardt N, Beck C, Huber D, et al. Optimized preoperative fasting times decrease ketone body concentration and stabilize mean arterial blood pressure during induction of anesthesia in children younger than 36 months: a prospective observational cohort study. <em>Pediatr Anesth</em>. 2016;26(8):838-843. PMID: 27291355.</li>
<li id="bib23">Thomas M, Morrison C, Newton R, Schindler E. Consensus statement on clear fluids fasting for elective pediatric general anesthesia. <em>Paediatr Anesth</em>. 2018;28(5):411-414. PMID: 29700894.</li>
<li id="bib24">Kain ZN, Mayes LC, Wang S-M, Caramico LA, Hofstadter MB. Parental presence during induction of anesthesia versus sedative premedication which intervention is more effective? <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 1998;89(5):1147-1156. PMID: 9822003.</li>
<li id="bib25">Malde AD. Dexmedetomidine as premedication in children: status at the beginning of 2017. <em>Indian J Anaesth</em>. 2017;61(2):101. PMID: 28250477.</li>
<li id="bib26">Caruso TJ, George A, Menendez M, et al. Virtual reality during pediatric vascular access: a pragmatic, prospective randomized, controlled trial. <em>Pediatr Anesth</em>. 2020;30(2):116-123.</li>
<li id="bib27">Nguyen N, Lavery WJ, Capocelli KE, et al. Transnasal endoscopy in unsedated children with eosinophilic esophagitis using virtual reality video goggles. <em>Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol</em>. 2019;17(12):2455-2462. PMID: 30708107.</li>
<li id="bib28">Fiadjoe JE, Nishisaki A, Jagannathan N, et al. Airway management complications in children with difficult tracheal intubation from the Pediatric Difficult Intubation (PeDI) registry: a prospective cohort analysis. <em>Lancet Respir Med</em>. 2016;4(1):37-48. PMID: 26705976.</li>
<li id="bib29">Galvez JA, Acquah S, Ahumada L, et al. Hypoxemia, bradycardia, and multiple laryngoscopy attempts during anesthetic induction in infants: a single-center, retrospective study. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2019;131(4):830-839. PMID: 31335549.</li>
<li id="bib30">Humphreys S, Lee-Archer P, Reyne G, Long D, Williams T, Schibler A. Transnasal humidified rapid-insufflation ventilatory exchange (THRIVE) in children: a randomized controlled trial. <em>Br J Anaesth</em>. 2017;118(2):232-238. PMID: 28100527.</li>
<li id="bib31">Jagannathan N, Burjek N. Transnasal humidified rapid-insufflation ventilatory exchange (THRIVE) in children: a step forward in apnoeic oxygenation, paradigm-shift in ventilation, or both? <em>Br J Anaesth.</em> 2017. 118(2):150-152. PMID: 28100516.</li>
<li id="bib32">Litman RS, Weissend EE, Shibata D, Westesson P-L. Developmental changes of laryngeal dimensions in unparalyzed, sedated children. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2003;98(1):41-45. PMID: 12502977.</li>
<li id="bib33">Garcia-Marcinkiewicz AG, Adams HD, Gurnaney H, et al. A retrospective analysis of neuromuscular blocking drug use and ventilation technique on complications in the pediatric difficult intubation registry using propensity score matching. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2019;131:1. PMID: 31567318.</li>
<li id="bib34"><a id="page726"></a>Asztalos L, Szab&#x00F3;-Ma&#x00E1;k Z, Gajdos A, et al. Reversal of vecuronium-induced neuromuscular blockade with low-dose sugammadex at train-of-four count of four. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2017;127(3):441-449. PMID: 28640017.</li>
<li id="bib35">Tobias JD. Current evidence for the use of sugammadex in children. <em>Pediatr Anesth</em>. 2017;27(2):118-125. PMID: 28585399.</li>
<li id="bib36">Won YJ, Lim BG, Lee DK, Kim H, Kong MH, Lee IO. Sugammadex for reversal of rocuronium-induced neuromuscular blockade in pediatric patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. <em>Medicine (Baltimore)</em>. 2016;95(34):e4678. PMID: 27559972.</li>
<li id="bib37">Bhananker SM, Ramamoorthy C, Geiduschek JM, et al. Anesthesia-related cardiac arrest in children: update from the pediatric perioperative cardiac arrest registry. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2007;105(2):344-350. PMID: 17646488.</li>
<li id="bib38">Christensen RE, Lee AC, Gowen MS, Rettiganti MR, Deshpande JK, Morray JP. Pediatric perioperative cardiac arrest, death in the off hours: a report from wake up safe, the pediatric quality improvement initiative. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2018;127(2):472-477. PMID: 29677059.</li>
<li id="bib39">Rouette J, Trottier H, Ducruet T, Beaunoyer M, Lacroix J, Tucci M. Red blood cell transfusion threshold in postsurgical pediatric intensive care patients: a randomized clinical trial. <em>Ann Surg</em>. 2010;251(3):421-427. PMID: 20118780.</li>
<li id="bib40">Gurnaney H, Kraemer FW, Maxwell L, Muhly WT, Schleelein L, Ganesh A. Ambulatory continuous peripheral nerve blocks in children and adolescents: a longitudinal 8-year single center study. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2014;118(3):621-627. PMID: 24413546.</li>
<li id="bib41">Voepel-Lewis T, Malviya S, Tait AR. A prospective cohort study of emergence agitation in the pediatric postanesthesia care unit. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2003;96(6):1625-1630. PMID: 12760985.</li>
<li id="bib42">Adzick NS, Thom EA, Spong CY, et al. A randomized trial of prenatal versus postnatal repair of myelomeningocele. <em>N Engl J Med</em>. 2011;364(11):993-1004. PMID: 21306277.</li>
<li id="bib43">Stricker PA, Shaw TL, Desouza DG, et al. Blood loss, replacement, and associated morbidity in infants and children undergoing craniofacial surgery. <em>Pediatr Anesth</em>. 2010;20(2):150-159. PMID: 20078812.</li>
<li id="bib44">Roland PS, Rosenfeld RM, Brooks LJ, et al. Clinical practice guideline: polysomnography for sleep-disordered breathing prior to tonsillectomy in children. <em>Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg</em>. 2011;145(1 suppl):S1-S15. PMID: 21676944.</li>
<li id="bib45">Jackson O, Basta M, Sonnad S, Stricker P, LaRossa D, Fiadjoe J. Perioperative risk factors for adverse airway events in patients undergoing cleft palate repair. <em>Cleft Palate Craniofac J</em>. 2013;50(3):330-336. PMID: 23083121.</li>
<li id="bib46">Canadian Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia Collaborative, Puligandla PS, Skarsgard ED, Offringa M, et al. Diagnosis and management of congenital diaphragmatic hernia: a clinical practice guideline. <em>Can Med Assoc J</em>. 2018;190(4):E103. PMID: 29378870.</li>
<li id="bib47">Mielniczuk M, Kusza K, Brzezi&#x0144;ski P, Jakubczyk M, Mielniczuk K, Czerwionka-Szaflarska M. Current management of congenital diaphragmatic hernia. <em>Anaesthesiol Intensive Ther</em>. 2012;44(4):259-264. PMID: 22481155.</li>
<li id="bib48">Blank RS, de Souza DG. Anesthetic management of patients with an anterior mediastinal mass: continuing professional development. <em>Can J Anesth</em>. 2011;58(9):853. PMID: 21779948.</li>
<li id="bib49">Cote CJ, Zaslavsky A, Downes JJ, et al. Postoperative apnea in former preterm infants after inguinal herniorrhaphy: a combined analysis. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 1995;82(4):809-822. PMID: 7717551.</li>
<li id="bib50">Davidson AJ, Morton NS, Arnup SJ, et al. Apnea after awake regional and general anesthesia in infants the general anesthesia compared to spinal anesthesia study &#x2013; comparing apnea and neurodevelopmental outcomes, a randomized controlled trial. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2015;123(1):38-54. PMID: 26001033.</li>
<li id="bib51">Burgoyne LL, Anghelescu DL. Intervention steps for treating laryngospasm in pediatric patients. <em>Pediatr Anesth</em>. 2008;18(4):297-302. PMID: 18315634.</li>
</ol>
<a id="page727"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp33_1" onclick="openLinkInNewTab('https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_caf/33_Anesthesia_and_Premature_Infants/story.html');">Infographic 33.1 A Closer Look at Anesthesia and Premature Infants <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<a id="page728"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp33_2" onclick="openLinkInNewTab('https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/33A_Pediatric_and_Neonatal_Anesthesia/index.html');">Interactive Video Lecture 33a. Pediatric and Neonatal Anesthesia <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<a id="page729"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp33_3" onclick="openLinkInNewTab('https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/33B_Pediatric_and_Neonatal_Anesthesia/index.html');">Interactive Video Lecture 33b. Pediatric and Neonatal Anesthesia <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<div class="link-me" id="grp33_4" onclick="openLinkInNewTab('https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/33C_Pediatric_and_Neonatal_Anesthesia/index.html');">Interactive Video Lecture 33c. Pediatric and Neonatal Anesthesia <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>