<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec189">VI. Cerebral Protection</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen484">A. Ischemic and Reperfusion</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Because of its high oxygen and glucose consumption, inability to store substrate, and inability to dispose of toxic metabolites, the brain is especially susceptible to rapid ischemic injury. With the accumulation of intracellular calcium under these ischemic conditions, neuronal damage quickly occurs and is compounded by the accumulation of lactic acid. Global ischemia, seen in conditions such as cardiac arrest, is responsive to interventions that restore total cerebral perfusion and oxygen-carrying capacity, such as cardiopulmonary resuscitation or red blood cell transfusion. Focal ischemia, on the other hand, is usually due to a regional insult, such as an embolus or intentional or unintentional arterial disruption. Treatment must be focused on restoring perfusion to the region in question. In cases of focal ischemia, a penumbra of salvageable tissue (watershed) usually surrounds the area that is damaged. Efforts must also be directed at &#x201C;saving&#x201D; this tissue, which is being supplied to some degree by collateral circulation. Much of the research being performed in <strong><em>cerebral protection</em></strong> today deals with this concept of &#x201C;saving the penumbra.&#x201D; Practical methods include augmentation of CPP and reducing brain edema in the acute setting (see section that follows). Another area under heavy study is that of reperfusion and &#x201C;reperfusion injury,&#x201D; in which reperfusion of previously ischemic brain tissue can actually worsen neurologic outcomes largely due to the production of free radicals derived from oxygen and mediators of inflammation.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">The brain is particularly susceptible to rapid ischemic injury because of its high oxygen and glucose consumption, inability to store substrate, and inability to dispose of toxic metabolites.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen485">B. Hypothermia</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Research into the cerebroprotective effects of <strong><em>hypothermia</em></strong> in humans has been largely disappointing, despite some encouraging animal studies. Theoretically, hypothermia should be extremely protective to the brain and spinal cord, as it lowers the CMRO<sub>2</sub> for the CNS to a much greater extent than anesthetics would. Although anesthetics can cause an isoelectric EEG (electrical silence), reducing the brain&#x2019;s metabolic activity by up to 60%, hypothermia can do far more by reducing even the brain&#x2019;s homeostatic (eg, mitochondrial) need for oxygen, which is required for basic neuronal survival. Despite this, mild to moderate reductions in core temperature in the face of cerebral ischemia have not yielded protective results in human studies and have been associated with worsened immunologic and clotting function.<sup><a href="ch030-sec10.xhtml#bib7">7</a></sup></p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen486">C. <a id="page633"></a>Medical Therapy for Cerebral Protection</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Similar to hypothermia, medical therapy for <strong><em>cerebral protection</em></strong> in its application to humans has been difficult to ascertain. Anesthetics, especially barbiturates, have been widely used in an attempt to lessen the burden of ischemia on neurons. Nearly all anesthetics (notable exceptions being ketamine and etomidate in low doses) can lower CMRO<sub>2</sub> and theoretically protect the brain. But only barbiturates have been shown in humans to provide some protection from focal (not global) ischemia. No agents have been definitively shown to provide protection from global ischemia. Nimodipine, a calcium channel blocker, is frequently used in the setting of subarachnoid hemorrhage. It may have the benefit in neurologic protection during brain ischemia, although its protective mechanism remains elusive. Within 8 hours of acute spinal cord injury, methylprednisolone (a steroid) has been used to limit the degree of secondary injury due to edema, although controversy still surrounds this technique. Other more experimental agents, such as lidocaine, tirilazad (steroid), magnesium, dexmedetomidine (&#x03B1;<sub>2</sub> agonist), and vitamin E (antioxidant) have been used in various ischemic settings, all with mixed results on neurologic protection and outcomes.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Glucose is the only substrate that can be aerobically metabolized by the brain under normal conditions.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen487">D. Glucose and Cerebral Ischemia</h5>
<p class="nonindent">As mentioned previously, ischemia is rapidly detrimental to the nervous system not only because of oxygen starvation, but also because glucose is the only substrate that can be aerobically metabolized by the brain under normal conditions. Glucose is not stored in the nervous system, so when glucose is absent due to limited or absent cerebral circulation, adenosine triphosphate is no longer available to neurons and cellular injury quickly ensues. Cerebral glucose consumption (5&#x00A0;mg/100&#x00A0;g/min), on a time scale, mimics CMRO<sub>2</sub>, so hypoxemia and hypoglycemia are roughly equally detrimental to the brain. With cerebral ischemia and hypoglycemia, lactate is metabolized to some extent in the brain, but with much less efficacy than glucose. Hyperglycemia (serum blood glucose &#x003E;180&#x00A0;mg/dL) in the setting of cerebral ischemia has also been shown to worsen neurologic outcomes, presumably by worsening cerebral acidosis in an anaerobic setting in which glucose is converted to lactic acid.<sup><a href="ch030-sec10.xhtml#bib8">8</a></sup></p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">The reason cellular injury ensues more quickly in the nervous tissue is because glucose is not stored in the nervous system, so when glucose is absent due to limited or absent cerebral circulation, adenosine triphosphate is no longer available to neurons and cellular injury quickly ensues.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen488">E. A Practical Approach</h5>
<p class="nonindent">&#x201C;True&#x201D; cerebral protection is hard to achieve or to prove, but practically speaking, certain techniques are commonly used for their possible benefit. Inhaled and intravenous anesthetics are generally &#x201C;protective,&#x201D; based on their known effect on CMRO<sub>2</sub>. For operations in which there is planned regional ischemia (eg, temporary clipping of cerebral vessels during aneurysm surgery), propofol given in a large bolus (1-2&#x00A0;mg/kg) followed by a high-dose infusion (150&#x00A0;&#x03BC;g/kg/min) is often used and titrated to induce burst suppression on the EEG <strong><em>prior</em></strong> to the planned ischemia (ischemic preconditioning). In cardiac or neurologic surgeries in which circulatory arrest is planned (eg, aortic arch repair, giant basilar aneurysm clipping), deep hypothermia (12&#x00B0;-18 &#x00B0;C) has been instituted to &#x201C;protect&#x201D; the nervous system with seemingly great success. Another example of practical neurologic protection involves the placement of a lumbar CSF drain prior to thoracoabdominal aortic repair, used to lower CSF pressure and ostensibly maintain spinal cord perfusion when radicular arteries originating from the aorta are at surgical risk.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Hyperglycemia (serum blood glucose &#x003E;180&#x00A0;mg/dL) in the setting of cerebral ischemia has also been shown to worsen neurologic outcomes, presumably by worsening cerebral acidosis in an anaerobic setting in which glucose is converted to lactic acid.</p>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>