<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec244">IV. Acute Pain</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen692">A. Surgical Stress Response and Preventive Analgesia</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Postoperative pain occurs by the mechanisms described above. The surgical stress response is the systemic response to the operation, in which cytokines are released with various negative responses. Chemical mediators of the surgical stress response include interleukin-1, interleukin-6, and tumor necrosis factor-<em>&#x03B1;,</em> which promote inflammation. Poorly controlled pain results in increased levels of catecholamine release, which in turn disrupts the neuroendocrine balance. Hormonal changes include increased secretion of cortisol and glucagon paired with decreased secretion of insulin and testosterone. Together these result in a catabolic state with a negative nitrogen balance, hyperglycemia, poor wound healing, muscle wasting, fatigue, and immune compromise. Other negative effects of the surgical stress response are tachycardia, hypertension, increased cardiac work, bronchospasm, splinting, pneumonia, ileus, oliguria, urinary retention, thromboembolism, impaired immunity, weakness, and anxiety. Preventive analgesia is the concept of perioperative strategies for reducing pain-mediated sensitization of the nervous system with the goal of reducing long-term pain. To be effective, preventive analgesia must cover the entire surgical field and be adequate enough to prevent nociception during surgery as well as the entire perioperative period.<sup><a href="ch038-sec05.xhtml#bib2">2</a></sup> This period of time is variable for each patient and type of surgical procedure, but typically is less than 30&#x00A0;days.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen693">B. Strategies for Acute Pain Management</h5>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>Patient-Controlled Analgesia</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">Intravenous patient-controlled analgesia (IV PCA) has been shown to be a safe alternative to intermittent intravenous boluses of opioids for acute pain, with improved patient satisfaction, decreased nursing requirements, and lower opioid requirements. The general principle is that the patient self-administers incremental boluses of medication at safe intervals, building up the dose until adequate analgesia is achieved. The most common agents for PCA use are morphine, hydromorphone, and fentanyl (<strong><a href="#tt38-3">Table 38.3</a></strong>). Programmable variables include <a id="page807"></a>starting bolus, demand dose and interval, basal infusion rate, and 1- or 4-hour limit. The demand dose should be a fraction of the usual therapeutic dose. The dosing interval should be after the medication effect begins and before it starts to wane to allow for cumulative effect. A basal infusion may be employed in a patient on long-term opioid therapy, but should seldom, if ever, be used in the opioid-na&#x00EF;ve patient. The 1- and 4-hour limits may be used to control overall dosage, but care must be taken not to restrict it so severely that the patient uses all the allowable boluses in the first portion of the time interval and is without analgesia for the remainder. PCA may result in overdose and respiratory depression. Side effects include nausea, pruritus, and altered mental status. Risk factors include obstructive sleep apnea, congestive heart failure, pulmonary disease, renal or hepatic failure, head injury, and altered mental status.</p>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt38-3"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;38.3</span> Common Dosing Parameters for Patient-Controlled Analgesia in Opiate-Naive Patients</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:20%;"></col>
<col style="width:30%;"></col>
<col style="width:20%;"></col>
<col style="width:30%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Opioid</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Demand Dose</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Lockout (min)</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Basal Infusion</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Fentanyl</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">20-50&#x00A0;&#x03BC;g</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">5-10</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">0-60&#x00A0;&#x03BC;g/h</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Hydromorphone</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">0.2-0.4&#x00A0;mg</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">6-10</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">0-0.4&#x00A0;mg/h</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Morphine</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">1-2&#x00A0;mg</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">6-10</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">0-2&#x00A0;mg/h</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">Derived from Macres SM, Moore PG, Fishman SM. Acute pain management. In: Barash PG, Cahalan MK, Cullen BF, et al, eds. <em>Clinical Anesthesia</em>. 8th ed. Wolters Kluwer; 2018:1562-1606.</p>
</div>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">The programmable variables when administering IV PCA include starting bolus, demand dose and interval, basal infusion rate, and 1- or 4-hour limit.</p>
</div>
<h6 class="h6">Neuraxial and Regional Analgesia</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Epidural infusion provides improved pain control with activity, decreased respiratory complications, and decreased postoperative ileus compared with systemic opioids. The placement of the catheter should be chosen to cover the dermatome levels of the surgical incision. Epidural local anesthetic provides somatic analgesia but may cause hypotension and weakness. Epidural opioids provide visceral analgesia but can cause pruritus, respiratory depression, and urinary retention. The combination of opioids and local anesthetic is synergistic and allows for reduced dosage compared with single-agent infusions, minimizing side effects. Clonidine may be a useful adjuvant but could contribute to bradycardia and hypotension. Hypotension usually responds to fluid administration. Pruritus is due to spinal <em>&#x03BC;</em> binding and is independent of histamine. Therefore, treatment is best accomplished with a low dose of mixed opioid agonist-antagonist, such as nalbuphine. Epidural infusions are usually continuous or continuous with a patient-administered bolus programmed. A relatively new strategy for epidural infusion dosing called programmed intermittent bolus (PIB) can additionally be utilized, which replaces the continuous slow infusion (usually over an hour) with a set bolus at a set time each hour.</p>
<p class="indent">Peripheral nerve blocks and continuous catheters are an important component of multimodal pain therapy as well. The discussion of this mode of anesthesia is beyond the scope of this chapter but is well discussed in <a href="ch021.xhtml">Chapter 21</a>.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen694">C. Special Cases in Acute Pain</h5>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>Pediatrics</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">Acute pain management in children must be tailored to the individual child and family. Assessment of pain is sometimes difficult in younger children, but family and other caregivers can aid in this evaluation. The same techniques can be employed in children as in adults. PCA in older children is safe, as long as no one other than the patient delivers a bolus dose. Epidural infusions and ultrasound-guided peripheral nerve blocks are useful and are commonly placed after induction of anesthesia, rather than awake, as in adults. Caudal injection of local anesthetic is an excellent treatment for postoperative pain for perineal, lower extremity, and lower abdominal cases. Local anesthetic must be dosed appropriately for weight.</p>
<h6 class="h6">The Opioid-Dependent Patient</h6>
<p class="nonindent">As a general rule, the perioperative period is not a time to wean opioid usage. Clinical observations show that opioid requirements are approximately doubled from baseline in the postoperative period. The patient&#x2019;s long-acting <a id="page808"></a>opioid should be continued unchanged. If fasting status prohibits dosing of oral medication, the equianalgesic amount should be administered as the baseline infusion in a PCA. The bolus dose should be set 25% to 50% higher than for an opioid-na&#x00EF;ve individual. Regional and epidural analgesia is helpful in reducing overall opioid dosage, though care should be taken not to administer opioids through more than one route. To avoid cumulative effect, epidural infusions often consist of local anesthetic only, paired with intravenous opioid PCA. Ketamine, NSAIDs, antiepileptics, acetaminophen, and antidepressants can assist with pain control and limit opioids as well. Medications should be weaned to baseline postoperatively.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Opioid requirements in the opioid-dependent patient are approximately doubled from baseline in the postoperative period.</p>
</div>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>Enhanced Recovery After Surgery and Multimodal Analgesia</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">Many institutions employ enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) protocols to facilitate the care of their surgical patients in the preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative settings. This multidisciplinary approach has been shown to decrease length of stay and reduce postoperative complications by using evidence-based strategies to reduce pain and nausea, minimize fluid shifts, and improve return of postoperative bowel function and ambulation.<sup><a href="ch038-sec05.xhtml#bib3">3</a></sup> Minimizing opioid use is crucial to reducing postoperative ileus and other side effects including respiratory depression and nausea, thus multimodal analgesia is often implemented. In addition to regional anesthesia, other techniques such as scheduled anti-inflammatory medications, gabapentinoids, intravenous local anesthetic (lidocaine), and ketamine infusions can be employed. However, much of the evidence for these protocols is in the colorectal literature and increasing number of subspecialty surgeries are beginning to find use for them.<sup><a href="ch038-sec05.xhtml#bib3">3</a></sup></p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>