<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/jquery.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
<!--<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-1.10.2.min.js'></script>-->
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-migrate-1.2.1.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery.qtip.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/etext.js'></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec240">VII. Lower Extremity Revascularization</h4>
<p class="nonindent">The incidence of PAD is increasing, especially in the aging population. Roughly 10 million people in the United States have symptomatic PAD, and another 20 to 30 million have asymptomatic PAD. The three indications for elective revascularization procedures include claudication, ischemic rest pain or ulceration, and gangrene. High-risk procedures, including iliofemoral bypass, femoral-femoral bypass, and aortofemoral bypass, reestablish blood flow to an ischemic extremity and relieve debilitating symptoms of claudication. However, advances in minimally invasive percutaneous techniques have made <strong><em>endovascular procedures</em></strong> the primary modality for revascularization. Regional or local anesthesia with or without sedation is often used for endovascular approaches. The majority of the procedure is not painful. However, tunneling the graft and deployment of the stent can be quite painful and trigger patient movement or hypertension and tachycardia. Heparin is given prior to deployment of grafts or stents, and anticoagulation may be needed in the postoperative period to maintain graft patency.</p>
<p class="BIBLIOGRAPHYpTitle">References</p>
<ol class="ref"><li id="bib1">Fleisher LA, Fleischmann KE, Auerbach AD, et al. 2014 ACC/AHA guideline on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and management of patients undergoing noncardiac surgery: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. <em>J Am Coll Cardiol</em>. 2014;64(22):e77-e137. doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2014.07.944</li>
<li id="bib2">Levine GN, Bates ER, Bittl JA, et al. 2016 ACC/AHA guideline focused update on duration of dual antiplatelet therapy in patients with coronary artery disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. <em>J Am Coll Cardiol</em>. 2016;68(10):1082-1115. doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2016.03.513</li>
<li id="bib3">Jonas DE, Feltner C, Amick HR, et al. Screening for asymptomatic carotid artery stenosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. <em>Ann Intern Med</em>. 2014;161(5):336-346. doi:10.7326/M14-0530</li>
<li id="bib4">Malik OS, Brovman EY, Urman RD. The use of regional or local anesthesia for carotid endarterectomies may reduce blood loss and pulmonary complications. <em>J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth</em>. 2019;33(4):935-942. doi:10.1053/j.jvca.2018.08.195</li>
<li id="bib5">Bonati LH, Dobson J, Featherstone RL, et al. Long-term outcomes after stenting versus endarterectomy for treatment of symptomatic carotid stenosis: the International Carotid Stenting Study (ICSS) randomised trial. <em>Lancet</em>. 2015;385(9967):529-538. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61184-3</li>
<li id="bib6"><a id="page795"></a><a id="page796"></a>Swerdlow NJ, Wu WW, Schermerhorn ML. Open and endovascular management of aortic aneurysms. <em>Circ Res</em>. 2019;124(4):647-661. doi:10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.118.313186</li>
</ol>
<div class="link-me" id="grp37_1" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/37_Management_of_Acute_Chronic_Pain/index.html'">Interactive Video Lecture 37. Management of Acute and Chronic Pain <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>