<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec232">VII. Postoperative Considerations</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Patients in the immediate postoperative period are at high risk for developing life-threatening complications, including respiratory failure, severe hemorrhage, cardiac tamponade, acute coronary graft failure, and prosthetic valve dysfunction (<strong><a href="#tt36-7">Table 36.7</a></strong>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen654">A. Urgent Reoperations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The incidence of urgent chest exploration after cardiac surgery is between 3% and 5%. The most common reasons are <strong><em>persistent bleeding</em></strong> and cardiac <strong><em>tamponade</em></strong>. It is critical to distinguish whether persistent bleeding is due to a coagulopathy or inadequate surgical hemostasis. Thromboelastography or coagulation studies, including prothrombin time, activated partial thromboplastin time, fibrinogen level, and platelet count, may confirm a coagulopathy and indicate the optimal treatment. If bleeding persists and coagulopathy is excluded, the patient should return to the operating room for surgical correction of the bleeding.</p>
<p class="video"><video data-id="vZLzsy9j" controls="controls" class="jwp-video" crossorigin="anonymous" style="width:100%; height:auto; width:320px; height:240px;">Browser issues</video></p>
<p class="video1" id="vid36-11"><strong>VIDEO 36.11</strong></p>
<p class="video2"><strong>Tamponade</strong></p>
<p class="indent">If drainage from the mediastinal chest tubes is not sufficient, cardiac tamponade can result and prompt surgical treatment is imperative. Tamponade must be included in the differential diagnosis of postoperative hypotension or low cardiac output states. It results in the collapse of cardiac chambers due to elevated pressures within the pericardium exceeding the pressures within the heart (particularly the atria). The normal signs and symptoms of tamponade are hypotension, paradoxical pulse, tachycardia, dyspnea, and orthopnea. TEE is an essential tool in making the prompt diagnosis of tamponade and expediting surgical intervention.</p>
<a id="page781"></a>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt36-7"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;36.7</span> Physiologic Effects of Congenital Cardiac Lesions</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Volume overload of the ventricle or atrium resulting in increased pulmonary blood flow</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Atrial septal defect (high flow, low pressure)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Ventricular septal defect (high flow, high pressure)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Patent ductus arteriosus (high flow, high pressure)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Endocardial cushion defect (high flow, high pressure)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Cyanosis resulting from obstruction to pulmonary blood flow</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Tetralogy of Fallot</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Tricuspid atresia</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Pulmonary atresia</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Pressure overload to the ventricle</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Aortic stenosis</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Coarctation of the aorta</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Pulmonary stenosis</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Cyanosis due to a common mixing chamber</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Total anomalous venous return</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Truncus arteriosus</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Double outlet right ventricle</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Single ventricle</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Cyanosis due to separation of the systemic and pulmonary circulation</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Transposition of the great vessels</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">From Skubas NJ, Lichtman AD, Wang CJ, Sharma A, Thomas SJ. Anesthesia for cardiac surgery. In: Barash PG, Cahalan MK, Cullen BF, et al, eds. <em>Clinical Anesthesia</em>. 8th ed. Wolters Kluwer; 2018:1077-1111, Table 39.21.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen655">B. Pain Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The desire to rapidly awaken and extubate patients following cardiac surgery has driven changes in the pain management. The use of <strong><em>shorter-acting narcotics</em></strong> (fentanyl and remifentanil) has become a prominent practice along with intrathecal opioids. Studies have confirmed the safety and efficacy of intrathecal opioids to enhance postoperative pain management and facilitate earlier tracheal extubation.<sup><a href="ch036-sec08.xhtml#bib9">9</a></sup> <strong><em>Dexmedetomidine</em></strong>, an intravenous &#x03B1;<sub>2</sub>-adrenergic agonist, has both sedative and analgesic properties without significant respiratory depression. Dexmedetomidine has been shown in multiple trials to decrease the time to tracheal extubation, and therefore, its use is increasing in postcardiac surgical patients, despite its current high cost.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>