<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec215">VIII. Common Pediatric Perioperative Complications</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen586">A. Postoperative Apnea</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Infants and neonates born preterm are at increased risk for postoperative apnea following administration of anesthetic and sedative agents.<sup><a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib49">49</a></sup> In addition to prematurity, a history of apnea and anemia are risk factors for postoperative apnea. Intravenous caffeine may be administered and is effective in reducing the incidence of apnea, although postoperative admission is still warranted based on postconceptional age. Based on the available data, many institutions admit all former preterm infants until they reach between <strong>55 and <em>60&#x00A0;weeks of postconception age</em></strong>.<sup><a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib50">50</a></sup> Postconceptual age is determined by the sum of gestational age and chronological age in weeks. Furthermore, children with obstructive sleep apnea may be especially sensitive to respiratory depression associated with narcotics and general anesthesia.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Children at risk for postoperative apnea should be admitted and observed on a ward with cardiorespiratory monitoring.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen587"><a id="page723"></a>B. Laryngospasm</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Incidence of <strong><em>laryngospasm</em></strong> is more common in children than adults. The estimated incidence rate ranges from 1 to 17.4 per 1000 anesthetics.<sup><a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib51">51</a></sup> When properly managed, laryngospasm typically results in no significant sequelae. However, it is a significant concern and continues to be a cause of cardiac arrest in children.<sup><a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib37">37</a>,<a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib38">38</a></sup> Treatment is with 100% oxygen, positive pressure, and maneuvers to ensure that upper airway obstruction is not present. Laryngospasm not relieved by these maneuvers should be treated with succinylcholine.<sup><a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib49">49</a></sup> If there are contraindications to succinylcholine, such as malignant hyperthermia or extensive burn injuries, a nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking agent may be appropriate. Deepening the anesthetic (eg, with 1-2&#x00A0;mg/kg of propofol) is an option in the early management of laryngospasm. Once desaturation has occurred, rapid neuromuscular blockade (succinylcholine) without delay is the treatment of choice. Secondary complications such as gastric insufflation, regurgitation, and aspiration can occur as a result of the sustained positive upper airway pressure that comprises appropriate management of laryngospasm.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen588">C. Postextubation Stridor</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Smaller children and infants are at increased risk for <strong><em>postextubation stridor</em></strong> due to their smaller diameter tracheas. Symptoms include a barky sounding cough (similar to infectious croup). More severe symptoms include respiratory compromise with retractions and dyspnea. Treatment for mild symptoms includes humidified air or mist. Dexamethasone 0.5&#x00A0;mg/kg up to 10&#x00A0;mg may be administered intravenously. More severe cases are treated with nebulized racemic epinephrine in addition to dexamethasone. Following treatment with racemic epinephrine, patients with improved symptoms should be observed for at least 4 hours to ensure rebound edema does not occur. Recrudescence of symptoms necessitates admission.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen589">D. Emergence Agitation or Delirium</h5>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><em>Emergence delirium</em></strong> is characterized by a state of delirium (confusion, lack of orientation to surroundings, agitation) in the immediate postoperative period following emergence from anesthesia.<sup><a href="ch033-sec09.xhtml#bib41">41</a></sup> Since the introduction of sevoflurane into clinical practice, the incidence of emergence agitation has surged. Risk factors include young age (2-7&#x00A0;years), sevoflurane use, poor adaptability, and procedures near the face (ear, nose, throat, or ophthalmology). Emergence agitation is a significant concern because agitated children can injure themselves, injure staff, or pull out catheters or drains and require additional staff to safely restrain and protect them. Emergence agitation also upsets parents and creates dissatisfaction. Most strategies have focused on prevention, and a variety of regimens are effective, including maintenance of anesthesia with propofol or intraoperative administration of dexmedetomidine, clonidine, and opioids. Initial management is typically observation and protection of the child from harm. More severe cases or prolonged cases may be managed with benzodiazepines, opioids, or subhypnotic doses of other sedatives.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>