<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/jquery.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
<!--<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-1.10.2.min.js'></script>-->
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-migrate-1.2.1.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery.qtip.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/etext.js'></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec233">VIII. Anesthesia for Children With Congenital Heart Disease</h4>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">In the United States, there are more adults than children with CHD.</p>
</div>
<p class="nonindent">Approximately eight children of every 1000 live births have congenital heart disease (CHD). Ventricular septal defect is the most common CHD, and many of these defects will close spontaneously. However, others will require surgical treatment, as will the complex defects such as tetralogy of Fallot, transposition of the great vessels, hypoplastic left heart syndrome, and atrioventricular septal defects. Progress in corrective and palliative surgical techniques for CHD has been enormous in the past 2&#x00A0;decades. Many children with these complex lesions can undergo cardiac surgical procedures and live full and productive <a id="page782"></a>lives. In fact, there are more adults alive today with CHD than children with CHD. Full coverage of anesthesia for CHD is beyond the scope of this chapter and can be found elsewhere.<sup><a href="#bib10">10</a></sup></p>
<p class="BIBLIOGRAPHYpTitle">References</p>
<ol class="ref"><li id="bib1">Nishimura RA, Otto CM, Bonow RO, et al. 2014 AHA/ACC guideline for the management of patients with valvular heart disease. <em>Circulation</em>. 2014;129:e521-e643.</li>
<li id="bib2">Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010 ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVM guidelines for the diagnosis and management of patients with thoracic aortic disease: executive summary. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2010;111:279-315.</li>
<li id="bib3">Patel HJ, Deeb GM. Ascending and arch aorta: pathology, natural history and treatment. <em>Circulation</em>. 2008;118:188-195.</li>
<li id="bib4">Augoustides JGT, Andritsos M. Innovations in aortic disease: the ascending aorta and aortic arch. <em>J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth</em>. 2010;24:198-207.</li>
<li id="bib5">Dobbs HA, Bennett-Guerrero E, White W, et al. Multinational institutional survey on patterns of intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography use in adult cardiac surgery. <em>J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth</em>. 2014;28:54-63.</li>
<li id="bib6">Hillis LD, Smith PK, Anderson JL, et al. 2011 ACCF/AHA guideline for coronary artery bypass graft surgery. <em>Circulation</em>. 2011;124:e652-e735.</li>
<li id="bib7">Denault AY, Deschamps A, Couture P. Intraoperative hemodynamic instability during and after separation from cardiopulmonary bypass. <em>Semin Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth</em>. 2010;14:165-182.</li>
<li id="bib8">Cheng DC, Bainbridge D, Martin JE, et al. Does off-pump coronary artery bypass reduce mortality, morbidity, and resource utilization when compared with conventional coronary artery bypass? A meta-analysis of randomized trials. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2005;102:188.</li>
<li id="bib9">Chaney MA. Intrathecal and epidural anesthesia and analgesia for cardiac surgery. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2006;102:45-64.</li>
<li id="bib10"><a id="page783"></a>Skubas NJ, Lichtman AD, Sharma A, et al. Anesthesia for cardiac surgery. In: Barash PG, Cullen BF, Stoelting RK, et al, eds. <em>Clinical Anesthesia</em>. 7th ed. Wolters Kluwer Health/Lippincott Williams &#x0026; Wilkins; 2013:1076.</li>
</ol>
<div class="link-me" id="grp36_1" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/36_Anesthesia_for_Vascular_Surgery/index.html'">Interactive Video Lecture 36. Anesthesia for Vascular Surgery <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>