<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec230">V. Preoperative and Intraoperative Management</h4>
<p class="nonindent">The preoperative evaluation of the cardiac surgical patient includes the essential elements required for all surgical patients (see <a href="ch016.xhtml">Chapter 16</a>). In addition, review of cardiac studies (ECG, echocardiogram, and cardiac catheterization data), laboratory values for hemoglobin, glucose, and renal function, and functional status allow detailed planning of anesthetic management, including the advisability of early extubation after surgery.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen648">A. Current Drug Therapy</h5>
<p class="nonindent">In general, <strong><em>most current medications</em></strong> should be continued until the time of surgery, including beta-blockers, antihypertensives, antiarrhythmics, calcium channel blockers, nitrates, statins, and aspirin. Insulin administration should be tailored to prevent hyper- or hypoglycemia.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Most current medications should be continued until the time of cardiac surgery, including beta-blockers, antihypertensives, antiarrhythmics, calcium channel blockers, nitrates, statins, and aspirin.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen649">B. Premedication</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Anxiolytics may be administered in hemodynamically stable patients with good underlying left ventricular function and respiratory drive. Caution should be used in patients with heart failure, respiratory failure, pulmonary hypertension, or significant obstructive valvular lesions. Benzodiazepines may produce prolonged sedation in elderly patients and prevent early postoperative extubation.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen650">C. Monitoring</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Hemodynamic monitoring is discussed in <a href="ch015.xhtml">Chapter 15</a>. This section will address techniques specific to the cardiac surgical patient. <strong><em>Direct arterial blood pressure monitoring</em></strong> is essential. During CPB, noninvasive techniques will not work because blood flow is nonpulsatile. Typically, the radial artery of the nondominant hand is cannulated for this purpose except when this artery will be used for coronary artery bypass grafting. Central venous access is required for infusion of vasoactive drugs and monitoring right atrial pressure. The pulmonary artery catheter or TEE can monitor pulmonary pressures, left ventricular filling pressures, and cardiac output. The use of these techniques is dependent on institutional practice and physician preference and varies widely. A recent study on the practice patterns of cardiac anesthesiologists showed that 67% use TEE in coronary artery bypass surgery, with even higher numbers reported for valve surgery.<sup><a href="ch036-sec08.xhtml#bib5">5</a></sup> TEE provides detailed information, <a id="page776"></a>such as new wall motion abnormalities, valvular abnormalities, guidance of cannula placement, detection of intracardiac air, and prosthetic valve function. Some centers use cerebral oximeters, a noninvasive technique that employs near-infrared spectrophotometry to monitor cerebral perfusion.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Blood flow during CPB is nonpulsatile, and therefore, blood pressure during CPB cannot be measured with noninvasive techniques.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen651">D. Selection of Anesthetic Drugs</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Outcome studies have not demonstrated the optimal anesthetic agent for patients undergoing cardiac surgery. Commonly, a volatile anesthetic agent and low to moderate doses of a narcotic are used in combination. The volatile agent decreases myocardial oxygen demand by lowering blood pressure and decreasing contractility, decreases the likelihood of awareness during surgery, and possibly provides protection from ischemic injury to the heart via a preconditioning mechanism. The narcotic decreases oxygen demand by lowering the heart rate and provides postoperative analgesia. In addition, the narcotic decreases the required dose of the volatile agent, potentially important in patients with depressed ventricular function. This &#x201C;balanced&#x201D; anesthetic is optimal if the goal is to extubate the patient&#x2019;s trachea early after surgery.<sup><a href="ch036-sec08.xhtml#bib6">6</a></sup> Nitrous oxide is often avoided because it can increase pulmonary artery pressure and expand air cavities and air emboli. High-dose narcotic and benzodiazepine techniques are rarely practiced today because &#x201C;<strong><em>fast-track</em></strong>&#x201D; techniques (extubation within 6 hours after surgery) are safe and cost-effective. Narcotics and benzodiazepines, when used concomitantly for induction of anesthesia, can cause hypotension and bradycardia. These effects can be offset with pancuronium but may be worsened by administration of vecuronium or cisatracurium. Etomidate, propofol, and barbiturates have been described as adjunct agents along with narcotics and fast-acting benzodiazepines for induction. Selection of one agent over another depends on the patient&#x2019;s underlying ventricular function and vascular tone. Etomidate is often chosen for induction of anesthesia because of its limited effects on hemodynamics. However, in the rare patient with underlying adrenal insufficiency, it may worsen adrenal dysfunction.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen652">E. Intraoperative Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">In addition to the usual operating room preparations, the cardiac operating room requires significant other preparations for intraoperative patient care: fluid warmers; pressure transducers for central venous, arterial, and pulmonary artery catheters (if used); inotropes, vasodilators, and vasopressor infusions; and pumps for other medication infusions. <strong><em>Cross-matched blood</em></strong> should be immediately available and checked for correct patient identifiers prior to surgical sternotomy. Even in a prepared environment, placing a hemodynamically unstable patient on emergent CPB takes a minimum 15 to 20 minutes. Preparation and checklists, as found in <strong><a href="#tt36-4">Table 36.4</a></strong>, are key in helping to prevent serious errors.</p>
<p class="indent">During the dissection phase of surgery prior to CPB, arrhythmias and hypotension are common, resulting from surgical manipulations near or on the heart, especially in cardiac reoperations. During this time, the anesthesiologist titrates anesthetic depth as needed for the highly variable level of surgical stimulation, performs the baseline TEE examination, and samples arterial blood for determination of blood gas values as well as electrolytes, hemoglobin, and the baseline ACT. <strong><em>Sternotomy</em></strong> can cause significant sympathetic stimulation that may be prevented by deepening the anesthetic level with narcotics or the volatile agent. Prior to aortic cannulation and initiation of CPB, heparin is administered and an ACT &#x003E; 400 seconds must be obtained to confirm adequate anticoagulation. During <strong><em>aortic cannulation</em></strong> and prior to initiation of CPB, the systolic blood pressure should be controlled to no more than 100&#x00A0;mm Hg to minimize the risk of aortic dissection. Once all cannulae are in place and <strong><em>adequate anticoagulation</em></strong> confirmed, CPB is begun. The patient&#x2019;s head should be examined for any discoloration signaling cannula malposition (plethora may represent venous cannula obstruction or a bright red color may represent aortic cannula malposition), cerebral oximetry monitored (if used), and the surgical field inspected for proper cardiac decompression. Ventilation should stop once CPB machine reaches full flow, which is typically 50 to 60&#x00A0;mL/kg/min.</p>
<a id="page777"></a>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt36-4"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;36.4</span> Anesthetic Preparation for Cardiac Surgery</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Anesthesia machine</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Routine check</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Airway</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Nasal cannula for oxygen</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Ventilation/intubation equipment</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Suction</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Difficult airway anticipated? Special equipment</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Inspired gas humidifier</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Circulatory access</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Catheters for peripheral and central venous and arterial access</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Intravenous fluids and infusion tubing and pumps</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Fluid warmer</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Monitors</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Standard ASA: ECG leads, blood pressure cuff, pulse oximeter, neuromuscular blockade monitor</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Temperature: Various probes (nasal, tympanic, bladder, rectal)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Transducers (arterial, pulmonary, and central venous pressure) zeroed</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Cardiac output computer: Proper constant inserted</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Awareness monitor (BIS)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Anticoagulation (ACT) monitor(s)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Recorder</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Medications</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">General anesthetic: Hypnotic/induction, amnestic/benzodiazepine, volatile, opioid, muscle relaxant</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Heparin (predrawn)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Cardioactive</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">In syringes: Nitroglycerin/nicardipine, calcium chloride, phenylephrine/ephedrine, epinephrine</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Infusions: Nitroglycerin, inotrope</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Antibiotics</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Miscellaneous</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Pacemaker with battery</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Defibrillator/cardioverter with external paddles and ECG cables</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Ultrasound system for central venous line insertion</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Compatible blood in operating room</p></td>
</tr></table>
<p class="tfoot">ASA, American Society of Anesthesiologists; ECG, electrocardiogram; BIS, bispectral index; ACT, activated clotting time.</p>
<p class="u_tfoot">From Skubas NJ, Lichtman AD, Wang CJ, Sharma A, Thomas SJ. Anesthesia for cardiac surgery. In: Barash PG, Cahalan MK, Cullen BF, et al, eds. <em>Clinical Anesthesia</em>. 8th ed. Wolters Kluwer; 2018:1077-1111, Table 39.12.</p>
</div>
<a id="page778"></a>
<p class="indent">During CPB, volatile or intravenous anesthetic agents are delivered in the CPB circuit to maintain anesthesia. Muscle relaxants should be continued and mean arterial pressure controlled to a range of 50 to 75&#x00A0;mm Hg by appropriate use of a volatile agent, vasopressor, or vasodilator. Preoperative vasopressor or inotropic support is discontinued during CPB. Blood glucose should be controlled in the 120 to 200&#x00A0;mg/dL range and hematocrit maintained at &#x003E;20%.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen653">F. Separation From CPB</h5>
<p class="nonindent">CPB can be discontinued when surgical hemostasis is adequate, the patient rewarmed to at least 36.5 &#x00B0;C, sinus rhythm restored at a rate between 70 and 100 beats per minute, mechanical ventilation resumed, and metabolic values optimized including pH&#x00A0;&#x003E;&#x00A0;7.36, hematocrit &#x003E;20%, and serum potassium &#x003C;6 mEq/L. As the arterial inflow from the CPB machine is decreased, venous drainage from the patient is restricted to allow the heart to generate cardiac output and blood pressure. When these are adequate, CPB is terminated. During this time, blood pressure is monitored closely and TEE is performed to look for intracardiac air, ventricular wall motion abnormalities, and ventricular filling and ejection. Vasoactive and inotropic drugs may be required to obtain adequate hemodynamics and perfusion. Studies have shown risk factors for difficulty in weaning from CPB include age &#x003E;70&#x00A0;years, left ventricular ejection fraction &#x003C;20%, female sex, reoperation, emergency operation, and recent myocardial infarction.<sup><a href="ch036-sec08.xhtml#bib7">7</a></sup> A checklist prior to discontinuation of CPB is helpful, as provided in <strong><a href="#tt36-5">Table 36.5</a></strong>. Electrical pacing of the heart may be required in the setting of AV nodal dysfunction, which is common after CPB.</p>
<p class="video"><video data-id="m6fwnkfc" controls="controls" class="jwp-video" crossorigin="anonymous" style="width:100%; height:auto; width:320px; height:240px;">Browser issues</video></p>
<p class="video1" id="vid36-8"><strong>VIDEO 36.8</strong></p>
<p class="video2"><strong>Protamine Reaction</strong></p>
<p class="indent">Once the patient is hemodynamically stable, anticoagulation is reversed by administration of intravenous <strong><em>protamine</em></strong>. Protamine is administered first as a small test dose to detect a possible inflammatory reaction and then, if no adverse effect is noted, given slowly over 5 to 10 minutes (typically 1&#x00A0;mg of protamine is administered for every 100 U of heparin). When one-third of the total protamine dose is administered, the perfusionist is alerted and suction of blood from the surgical into the venous reservoir is terminated to prevent clot formation in the CPB machine. After protamine infusion is complete, an ACT is measured to confirm adequate reversal of anticoagulation and arterial blood sampled to confirm maintenance of appropriate blood gas values, electrolytes, and hemoglobin.</p>
<p class="video"><video data-id="AlErOLB1" controls="controls" class="jwp-video" crossorigin="anonymous" style="width:100%; height:auto; width:320px; height:240px;">Browser issues</video></p>
<p class="video1" id="vid36-9"><strong>VIDEO 36.9</strong></p>
<p class="video2"><strong>Chest Closure</strong></p>
<p class="indent">If separation from CPB is difficult, right or left ventricular failure is the likely cause. Ischemia from air embolism, poor myocardial protection, reperfusion injury, and pulmonary hypertension can all cause ventricular dysfunction. Common drug therapy and doses are listed in <strong><a href="ch036-sec06.xhtml#tt36-6">Table 36.6</a></strong>. Patients who require significant inotropic support for ventricular failure may need mechanical support. Placement of an intra-aortic balloon pump should be considered when postbypass ischemia is suspected, whereas severe ventricular dysfunction may require placement of a ventricular assist device until ventricular recovery. Patients who suffer significant pulmonary failure may need oxygenation via extracorporeal membrane oxygenation as a temporary measure.</p>
<a id="page779"></a>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt36-5"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;36.5</span> Checklist Before Separation From Cardiopulmonary Bypass</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Laboratory Values</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Hematocrit, ABGs</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">K<sup>+</sup>: ? elevated (cardioplegia)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Ionized Ca<sup>2+</sup></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Anesthetic/machine</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Lung compliance: Evaluate (hand ventilation)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Lungs are expanded, no atelectasis, both are ventilated (manual or mechanical)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Vaporizers: Off</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Alarms: On</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Monitors</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Normothermia (37 &#x00B0;C nasopharyngeal, 35.5 &#x00B0;C bladder, 35 &#x00B0;C rectal)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">ECG: Rate, rhythm, ST</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Transducers rezeroed and leveled</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Arterial and filling pressures</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Recorder (if available)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Patient/field</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">LOOK AT THE HEART!</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Deaired: Check lead II, TEE</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Eyeball contractility, size, rhythm</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">LV vent clamped/removed, caval snares released</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Bleeding: No major sites (grafts, suture lines, LV vent site)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Vascular resistance: CPB flow&#x00A0;&#x221D;&#x00A0;MAP&#x00A0;&#x00F7;&#x00A0;Resistance</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Support</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">As needed</p></td>
</tr></table>
<p class="tfoot">ABGs, arterial blood gases; CPB, cardiopulmonary bypass; ECG, electrocardiogram; LV, left ventricle; MAP, mean arterial pressure; TEE, transesophageal echocardiography.</p>
<p class="u_tfoot">From Skubas NJ, Lichtman AD, Wang CJ, Sharma A, Thomas SJ. Anesthesia for cardiac surgery. In: Barash PG, Cahalan MK, Cullen BF, et al, eds. <em>Clinical Anesthesia</em>. 8th ed. Wolters Kluwer; 2018:1077-1111, Table 39.15.</p>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>