<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec205">III. Anesthetic Management of Specific Injuries</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen547">A. Traumatic Brain Injuries or Head Injury</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The most important consideration in the anesthetic management of patients with TBI is the prevention of secondary neurologic injury. As noted previously, <a id="page691"></a>reductions in blood pressure or oxygenation contribute significantly to mortality and must be avoided in head-injured patients. Perioperative anesthetic management of TBI is discussed in detail in <a href="ch030.xhtml">Chapter 30</a>.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen548">B. Spine and Spinal Cord Injury</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Clinical presentation of patients with SCI can vary greatly depending on the level and severity of each injury. In addition to spinal immobilization, maintaining mean arterial pressure at 85 to 90&#x00A0;mm Hg is recommended to support spinal perfusion and prevent secondary injury. In high thoracic to cervical SCI cases, ventilation and oxygenation might be compromised (due to diaphragm or intercostal muscle impairment), necessitating airway intervention and ventilatory support. As noted previously, steroids are not indicated in SCI and may worsen patients&#x2019; outcome. Perioperative management of SCI and spine surgery is discussed in detail in <a href="ch026.xhtml">Chapter 26</a>.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen549">C. Soft Tissue Neck Injury</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The primary anesthetic consideration with neck injuries is airway management, as the trachea may be involved. Large hematomas outside the airway can cause a midline shift of the trachea. Direct injury to the trachea can create a false passage for the endotracheal tube. Signs of tracheal or laryngeal injury in the trauma patient with neck injury include altered phonation, hoarseness, stridor, and subcutaneous emphysema. As in the management of any traumatized airway, careful preoxygenation and RSI with direct or video laryngoscopy are generally safe. However, if there is significant concern for airway involvement, <strong><em>awake tracheal intubation with flexible bronchoscopy</em></strong> is indicated.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen550">D. Chest Injury</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Chest injuries can involve the heart, lungs, great vessels, and aerodigestive tract. Primary survey evaluation includes assessment of breath sounds and heart tones. Absent or asymmetric breath sounds suggest <strong><em>pneumothorax</em></strong> or <strong><em>hemothorax</em></strong>, while distant heart tones, especially when accompanied by distended jugular veins, suggest <strong><em>cardiac tamponade</em></strong>. A portable chest x-ray can confirm pneumothorax or hemothorax but should not delay immediate decompression of a <strong><em>tension pneumothorax</em></strong> if cardiovascular instability is present. Hemothorax and pneumothorax are both treated by placement of a chest tube. If blood &#x003E;2&#x00A0;L is initially removed or &#x003E;150&#x00A0;mL/h is drained from the chest tube, then an exploratory thoracotomy is indicated. Surgeons will often require one-lung ventilation in these cases, necessitating placement of a lung isolation device such as a double-lumen endotracheal tube (see <a href="ch035.xhtml">Chapter 35</a>). In an emergency, a simple endotracheal tube can be advanced into the right mainstem bronchus to isolate the left lung.</p>
<p class="video"><video data-id="a1ACbmgj" controls="controls" class="jwp-video" crossorigin="anonymous" style="width:100%; height:auto; width:320px; height:240px;">Browser issues</video></p>
<p class="video1" id="vid32-2"><strong>VIDEO 32.2</strong></p>
<p class="video2"><strong>Tension Pneumothorax</strong></p>
<p class="video"><video data-id="UzWv6RXN" controls="controls" class="jwp-video" crossorigin="anonymous" style="width:100%; height:auto; width:320px; height:240px;">Browser issues</video></p>
<p class="video1" id="vid32-3"><strong>VIDEO 32.3</strong></p>
<p class="video2"><strong>Chest Tube Insertion</strong></p>
<p class="indent">Cardiac tamponade in trauma is a life-threatening condition in which blood fills the pericardium and restricts both venous return and cardiac output. Transthoracic ultrasound is used to quickly evaluate both cardiac function and the presence of pericardial fluid. Tamponade can be relieved by <strong><em>pericardiocentesis</em></strong> or a <strong><em>pericardial window</em></strong>. Before the procedure, care must be taken to minimize positive intrathoracic pressure (to facilitate venous return) and maintain systemic vascular resistance (eg, phenylephrine) to ensure adequate coronary perfusion.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen551">E. Abdominal and Pelvic Injuries</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The <strong><em>focused assessment with sonography in trauma (FAST)</em></strong> examination evaluates the pericardium, hepatorenal recess (Morison pouch), splenorenal region, and pelvic floor. Hypoechoic signals represent free fluid (blood) and suggest the need <a id="page692"></a>for exploratory surgery in blunt trauma settings. In hemodynamically stable patients, an abdominal CT scan identifies intra-abdominal and pelvic injuries with more anatomic specificity. Unstable patients, however, should be taken immediately to the operating room without CT imaging. Major abdominal trauma can include devastating solid organ injury, major vascular injury, and hollow organ contamination. To facilitate surgical exposure, abdominal wall relaxation must be maintained for the duration of the surgery. As noted above, surgeons may perform <strong><em>&#x201C;damage control surgery,&#x201D;</em></strong> with goals of identifying and packing sites of major hemorrhage, control of contamination and temporary abdominal closure, thereby allowing time for resuscitation and correction of hypothermia and coagulopathy. More stable patients are later returned to the operating room for more definitive and lengthy surgical repairs.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">&#x201C;Damage control surgery&#x201D; refers to emergent surgical procedures or emergency interventional radiology procedures with the specific limited goals of rapidly identifying and treating life-threatening blood loss or other conditions, but transiently postponing definitive surgical repair until the patient can be medically stabilized.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">Selected abdominopelvic injuries are increasingly being treated in the <strong><em>interventional radiology</em></strong> setting. A hybrid operating room that includes advanced imaging is often used. These facilities require the same level of anesthesia equipment and staffing as a standard operating room to ensure optimal anesthetic management and resuscitation.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen552">F. Extremity Injuries</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Extremity injuries can run the spectrum from simple lacerations and fractures to traumatic amputations. Blood loss from extremity injuries can be surprisingly high (<strong><a href="ch032-sec04.xhtml#tt32-4">Table 32.4</a></strong>) and must be anticipated. Obvious bleeding from an extremity should be promptly controlled, initially with direct pressure and elevation of the extremity. Tourniquets should be considered early in cases of uncontrolled hemorrhage and can be left in situ for 2 to 3 hours, and then released only when the team is fully prepared for surgical intervention.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen553">G. Open Globe Injuries</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Important perioperative consideration for open globe injury is avoiding increases in the <strong><em>intraocular pressure (IOP)</em></strong> that could lead to extruded vitreous and loss of vision. Thus, succinylcholine should be avoided, and rocuronium is used as an alternative neuromuscular blocker for RSI (see <a href="ch029.xhtml">Chapter 29</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>