<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec190">VII. Anesthetic Management</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen489">A. Preoperative Evaluation</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The <a id="page634"></a>preoperative evaluation of the neurosurgical patient is of paramount importance in ensuring a safe and successful anesthetic. For patients with intracranial mass lesions, the most important fact to ascertain is the presence and extent of intracranial hypertension, or elevated ICP, and this should be assumed until information proves otherwise. This information can be obtained most readily from the history and physical examination, computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans, and ICP measurements (if available). Patients with elevated ICP may complain of headaches, dizziness, visual or gait disturbances, nausea or vomiting, and seizures. On physical examination, such patients may exhibit abnormalities such as papilledema, loss of strength or sensation, and cranial nerve dysfunction. CT or MRI of the brain are generally most helpful in quantifying the degree of ICP derangement, with slit ventricles and a midline shift &#x003E;5&#x00A0;mm indicating advanced pathology. Lastly, a careful evaluation of laboratory values may demonstrate electrolyte disturbances, which can be due to pituitary pathology (eg, <strong><em>syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone [SIADH]</em></strong> secretion), diuretics, or anticonvulsants being taken by the patient.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">CT or MRI of the brain is generally most helpful in quantifying the degree of ICP derangement.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">In patients with elevated ICP, sedative or anxiolytic premedication must be carefully titrated or avoided completely. Benzodiazepines and opioids, even in small doses, can depress respiration, leading to elevated Pa<span class="usmall">CO</span><sub>2</sub> and subsequent brain herniation. On the other hand, steroids (eg, dexamethasone) and anticonvulsants should be continued preoperatively.</p>
<p class="indent">Preoperative evaluation of patients presenting for spine surgery, especially in the acute setting, should focus on (1) the level of injury, (2) the degree of neurologic impairment (complete vs incomplete), (3) the timing of injury (less or more than 8 hours), (4) the complete neurologic examination, (5) current hemodynamic conditions, and (6) the airway examination. Carefully planning endotracheal intubation and subsequent hemodynamic management of these patients is vital. Advanced airway techniques (eg, awake fiberoptic intubation) and critical blood or fluid management with concomitant vasopressor use (eg, during spinal shock) may be required.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">ICP can be best controlled during induction of anesthesia by using a generous dose of opioid and intravenous lidocaine (1.5&#x00A0;mg/kg) prior to the induction drug to blunt the sympathetic response to laryngoscopy, while simultaneously ensuring eucapnia.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen490">B. Induction of Anesthesia and Airway Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Proper induction of anesthesia and airway management are critically important in neuroanesthesia, especially in those patients who have elevated ICP and unsecured aneurysm or cervical spinal cord injury. Elevated ICP demands constant attention during induction and intubation; ICP must be controlled, while CPP must be maintained. To that end, anesthetic induction of patients with elevated ICP should be slow and controlled, with constant attention to the blood pressure throughout the process. In many cases, preinduction arterial catheterization, osmotic diuresis, and CSF drainage are helpful. Patients with elevated ICP should receive a generous dose of opioid and intravenous lidocaine (1.5&#x00A0;mg/kg) prior to the induction drug to blunt the sympathetic response to laryngoscopy, at the same time maintaining normo- to hyperventilation to ensure eucapnia. Following induction and muscle relaxation, hyperventilation by mask should be performed in anticipation of the period of apnea that will accompany the intubation attempt. During intubation, strict control of blood pressure is important, as a rapid increase in arterial blood pressure will worsen ICP, while hypotension and decreased CPP would also be detrimental. In the <a id="page635"></a>case of a cervical spinal cord injury, maintenance of MAP is important during induction, while the actual performance of intubation may require more complex techniques (eg, awake fiberoptic intubation, midline stabilization, etc) to ensure that the spinal cord is not further compromised.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Until the dura is open, strict control of blood pressure and ICP is important, as a rapid increase in arterial blood pressure will worsen ICP, while hypotension will decrease CPP&#x2014;both of which are detrimental.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen491">C. Maintenance of Anesthesia</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The maintenance of anesthesia in neurosurgical patients requires regimens that vary depending on the hemodynamic and monitoring goals for that procedure. Generally speaking, for intracranial surgeries, ICP control is paramount until the dura is opened. To this end, once Mayfield fixation of the head and positioning are safely completed, mannitol (0.5-1.5&#x00A0;g/kg) is administered, as are steroids (eg, dexamethasone 10-20&#x00A0;mg) and, in some cases, a prophylactic anticonvulsant. Anesthetic regimen depends on the ICP and whether neuromonitoring is being employed. For patients with elevated ICP, volatile anesthetics are often limited to 0.5 minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) to minimize the degree of cerebral vasodilation and inhibition of autoregulation that they cause. Half-MAC volatile anesthesia is supplemented with intravenous agents such as propofol or opioid by infusion. This regimen works well in neuromonitoring cases also, where &#x003E;0.5 MAC of volatile agent may interfere with SSEP and MEP monitoring (MEP is more sensitive than SSEP). Muscle relaxants are generally used, unless they are limited by the MEP monitoring. Nitrous oxide is generally avoided because of its mild vasodilating effects, potential for expanding pneumocephalus, and unfavorable effects on neuromonitoring. Throughout the procedure, CPP must be maintained (often requiring a vasopressor). Because CBF autoregulation is greatly inhibited due to the disease process or the anesthetic, CBF will be directly dependent on MAP (or CPP). In cases of acute spinal cord injury, many of the same principles apply regarding maintenance of anesthesia, as spinal cord perfusion (especially in cervical spine surgery) and the ability to perform neuromonitoring are of great concern.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen492">D. Ventilation Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Ventilatory management of patients undergoing neurosurgery is also a key consideration. For patients undergoing an intracranial procedure, tidal volume should be maintained at 6 to 8&#x00A0;mL/kg (ie, lung-protective strategy) to minimize potential inflammatory injury to the lungs, with peak pressures kept at &#x003C;30&#x00A0;cm&#x00A0;H<sub>2</sub>O. These principles hold especially true for patients with subarachnoid hemorrhage, who may already exhibit acute lung injury or adult respiratory distress syndrome. Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) should be avoided unless needed to improve oxygenation, as it increases intrathoracic pressure and may impede cerebral venous drainage. Positive pressure ventilation is generally used for neurosurgical procedures, as it allows direct control of Pa<span class="usmall">CO</span><sub>2</sub>. Positive pressure ventilation is especially beneficial during sitting craniotomies, where negative intrathoracic pressure that would occur during a spontaneous breath may contribute to the development of venous air embolism.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen493">E. Fluids and Electrolytes</h5>
<p class="nonindent">For many years, fluid maintenance during craniotomy was aimed to keep the patient &#x201C;dry,&#x201D; so as to minimize the amount of reactive cerebral edema both during the surgery and postoperatively. This strategy is generally no longer considered optimal, as it is now known that the primary goal of fluid <a id="page636"></a>management in these cases should be to maintain cerebral perfusion, which is a more important consideration and will actually lessen cerebral edema. Hence, the goal of fluid management should be to keep the patient euvolemic at all times. Isotonic solutions should always be used (eg, 0.9% normal saline), as hypotonic solutions (eg, 0.45% half normal saline) in greater amounts can contribute to cerebral edema. Glucose-containing solutions are avoided, as hyperglycemia is detrimental to cerebral metabolism (see above), and because glucose is quickly metabolized and not osmotically active, leaving hypotonic free water, which can worsen edema.</p>
<p class="video"><video data-id="Hd8Kc6Lz" controls="controls" class="jwp-video" crossorigin="anonymous" style="width:100%; height:auto; width:320px; height:240px;">Browser issues</video></p>
<p class="video1" id="vid30-3"><strong>VIDEO 30.3</strong></p>
<p class="video2"><strong>Cerebral Edema</strong></p>
<p class="indent">Depending on patient comorbidities and length of the surgery, electrolyte derangements may be common and require close monitoring. Certainly, patients with pre- or intraoperative SIADH or <strong><em>diabetes insipidus (DI)</em></strong> will require careful monitoring of electrolytes. Hypertonic saline (3%) supplementation (given slowly to prevent central pontine myelinolysis) may also be needed. <strong><em>Mannitol</em></strong>, especially at large doses, can cause mild electrolyte derangements, which are generally short lived (eg, hyponatremia, hyperkalemia). These should be monitored as well. Given in large amounts, 0.9% normal saline can cause hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis, and care should be taken to avoid this.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen494">F. Transfusion Therapy</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The transfusion of blood and blood products is often needed during neurosurgical procedures. Preoperatively, coagulation studies should be noted. Anticoagulants should be discontinued in consultation with the physician prescribing anticoagulation. Neurosurgical patients having nonemergency surgery should have a platelet count &#x003E;100,000/mm<sup><a href="ch030-sec10.xhtml#bib3">3</a></sup>. Red blood cells that have been typed and crossed should be available for most craniotomies, especially for neurovascular procedures (eg, aneurysm clipping, arteriovenous malformation [AVM] resection) or for resection of tumors that invade the cranial sinuses. Coagulopathies may develop with the release of brain tissue thromboplastin. These should be treated with fresh frozen plasma, platelets, or cryoprecipitate as needed. Complex spine surgery (especially with planned osteotomies or due to tumor) is usually associated with more profound blood loss and transfusion therapy. In these cases, multiple units of blood products should be immediately available and close, repeated monitoring of the hemoglobin level and coagulation studies should be performed.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen495">G. Glucose Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">As discussed previously, glucose management is very important in neurosurgical cases, with the desire to avoid both hypo- and hyperglycemia. Some have advocated for &#x201C;tight glucose control,&#x201D; in which the range of acceptable serum glucose perioperatively is very narrow (eg, 90-120&#x00A0;mg/dL) and tightly controlled with insulin. Others disagree with such intensive glucose control, arguing that the incidence of hypoglycemia is increased with such a strategy. In any case, most neuroanesthesiologists agree that serum glucose during neurosurgical procedures should be maintained in the 90 to 180&#x00A0;mg/dL range. For hyperglycemia exceeding this range, regular insulin should be readily available and can be given intravenously as a bolus with or without an infusion. In these cases, monitoring of serum glucose must be frequent enough to capture episodes of hypoglycemia. In cases of hypoglycemia, dextrose (eg, dextrose 50% in water) should be administered in 20 to 50&#x00A0;mL doses depending on the degree of hypoglycemia.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen496"><a id="page637"></a>H. Emergence</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Emergence from anesthesia after neurosurgical procedures requires meticulous attention to maintaining stable hemodynamic and ventilatory parameters, yet ensuring a patient is sufficiently responsive as to allow neurologic examination immediately after the operation. Postcraniotomy hypertension is a well-described, albeit poorly understood, phenomenon, but can certainly be detrimental as it may increase cerebral bleeding from the resection bed and worsen cerebral edema. Careful analgesia (so as not to obtund the patient postoperatively) is helpful in controlling this hypertension, but usually antihypertensive medications are required as well (eg, labetalol, nicardipine). Patients emerging from cerebral AVM resection are particularly vulnerable because the resection bed is more likely to bleed. Patients having undergone posterior fossa surgery, who may also have brainstem compromise, may emerge more slowly and the time to safe extubation may be prolonged. Coughing on emergence should be avoided for all patients because it increases the risk of bleeding and elevation in ICP. A low-dose opioid infusion or intravenous lidocaine may be helpful in this regard. Likewise, postoperative nausea and vomiting should be prophylactically treated in these cases for the same reasons.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Postcraniotomy hypertension is detrimental because it may increase cerebral bleeding from the resection bed and worsen cerebral edema.</p>
</div>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Coughing on emergence should be avoided for all patients because it increases the risk of bleeding and elevation in ICP.</p>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>