<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec228">III. Aortic Diseases</h4>
<p class="nonindent">The aorta is made up of the aortic root, the ascending aorta, the aortic arch, and the descending thoracic aorta, as seen in <strong><a href="ch036-sec02.xhtml#ff36-1">Figure 36.1</a></strong>. Diseases of the aorta can be localized to one segment or multiple segments or involve the entire aorta. Diseases of the aorta may be acquired (traumatic injury, hypertension, occlusive disease, inflammation, infection) or congenital (coarctation, patent ductus arteriosus, connective tissue disorders) and can lead to aortic dissection, aortic aneurysm, intramural hematoma, or aortic transection.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen645">A. Aortic Dissection</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Aortic dissection occurs due to a tear in the intimal and medial layers of the aorta, which causes separation of the walls and leads to creation of a <strong><em>false lumen</em></strong>. Blood travels into the false lumen of the media and can travel the length of the vessel. Intimal tears typically originate from an ulcer due to chronic hypertension or connective tissue disorders, such as Marfan syndrome. As the false lumen propagates, thrombus and dissecting layers can cause disruption in perfusion of vital organs due to decreased blood flow to major arteries such as the carotids, subclavian, spinal, or mesenteric arteries.</p>
<p class="indent"><strong><em>Type A aortic dissection</em></strong>, which involves the ascending aorta, is a <strong><em>surgical emergency</em></strong> with a mortality that increases exponentially by the hour. It is often associated with cardiac tamponade, myocardial ischemia (due to dissection of coronary arteries), and acute aortic insufficiency. Symptoms may involve syncope, stroke-like sequelae, and chest pain. <strong><em>Type B dissections</em></strong> involve the aorta distal to the left subclavian artery and can be <strong><em>managed medically</em></strong> unless ongoing symptoms (back pain, abdominal pain, or embolic or ischemic phenomenon) persist or end-organ failure develops. Medical therapy focuses on decreasing aortic wall stress and controlling heart rate and blood pressure with beta-blockers and nondihydropyridine calcium channel&#x2013;blocking agents.<sup><a href="ch036-sec08.xhtml#bib2">2</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Although contrast-enhanced spiral computed tomography scanning is the gold standard for diagnosis, TEE can be used to confirm the diagnosis in unstable patients where immediate surgery is needed. Also, TEE plays an important role in diagnosing concomitant pathology such as aortic insufficiency, tamponade, and left ventricular failure. However, TEE cannot reliably image the distal ascending aorta and proximal aortic arch. Patients with type A dissection require aortic graft placement and may need aortic valve replacement and reattachment of the coronary arteries or arch vessels, depending on the location of the dissection.</p>
<a id="page773"></a>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt36-3"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;36.3</span> Acute Aortic Dissection: Hemodynamic Goals</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:25%;"></col>
<col style="width:75%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Preload</strong></p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">May be increased if acute AI, increase further in tamponade</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Afterload</strong></p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Decrease with anesthetics, analgesics, arterial dilators (nitroprusside, nicardipine): Keep systolic BP&#x00A0;&#x003C;&#x00A0;100-120&#x00A0;mm Hg</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Contractility</strong></p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">May be depressed; titrate myocardial depressants carefully</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Rate</strong></p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Decrease to &#x003C;60-80 bpm: Use beta-blocker; ensure contractility is adequate</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Rhythm</strong></p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">If atrial fibrillation present: Control ventricular response</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>MVO</strong><sub>2</sub></p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Compromised if aortic dissection involves coronary vessels</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>CPB</strong></p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Alternate site of inflow (arterial) cannulation, deep hypothermic circulatory arrest possible if cerebral vessels are involved</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">AI, aortic insufficiency; BP, blood pressure; bpm, beats per minute; CPB, cardiopulmonary bypass; MVO<sub>2</sub>, myocardial oxygen consumption.</p>
<p class="u_tfoot">From Skubas NJ, Lichtman AD, Wang CJ, Sharma A, Thomas SJ. Anesthesia for cardiac surgery. In: Barash PG, Cahalan MK, Cullen BF, et al, eds. <em>Clinical Anesthesia</em>. 8th ed. Wolters Kluwer; 2018:1077-1111, <a href="ch039-sec04.xhtml#tt39-3">Table 39.3</a>.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">Anesthetic management for aortic dissection involves <strong><em>prevention of hypertension</em></strong>, adequate intravenous access, including central venous access, invasive arterial blood pressure monitoring (usually via the right radial artery), and intraoperative TEE. Hemodynamic goals are listed in <strong><a href="#tt36-3">Table 36.3</a></strong>.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen646">B. Aortic Aneurysm</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The aorta is an elastic structure that changes shape with each cardiac contraction. Its normal diameter is 2 to 3&#x00A0;cm. Degenerative diseases, along with age, hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, and atherosclerosis, cause premature loss of its elasticity and are the major cause of aortic aneurysms. Connective tissue diseases such as Marfan syndrome cause cystic medial necrosis, mostly involving the aortic root. Men are more affected than women, and the age of presentation is 50 to 70&#x00A0;years.<sup><a href="ch036-sec08.xhtml#bib3">3</a></sup> The majority of people with aortic aneurysms are asymptomatic when diagnosed, unless there is significant aortic insufficiency or mass effect compressing nearby structures such as the trachea or esophagus (eg, hoarseness, cough, dysphagia).</p>
<p class="indent">Patients with an aortic <strong><em>diameter of 5.5&#x00A0;cm</em></strong> or greater should undergo surgical repair. In patients with Marfan syndrome or a bicuspid aortic valve, surgical repair is indicated when the aortic diameter reaches 4.5&#x00A0;cm because in these diseases the rate of aneurysm expansion is faster than in other diseases. Aortic repair with or without coronary implantation and aortic valve replacement may be required in patients with root aneurysms. Involvement of the great vessels may require deep hypothermic circulatory arrest for reconstruction of the aortic arch.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">An aortic diameter of &#x003E;5.5&#x00A0;cm is an indication for surgical repair.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">Cerebral protective procedures, such as retrograde or antegrade cerebral perfusion, may also be used to provide hypothermic protective effects on brain tissue, flush toxins, and decrease the cerebral metabolic rate. Cerebral protective effects are controversial and results have been confounding.<sup><a href="ch036-sec08.xhtml#bib4">4</a></sup> Left heart bypass, from the left atrium to the femoral artery, can provide retrograde aortic perfusion to aortic branches distal to the repair to perfuse the spine and abdomen.</p>
<p class="indent">The anesthetic management for patients with aortic aneurysms is similar to that for patients with aortic dissection. The use of <strong><em>spinal fluid drains</em></strong> to <a id="page774"></a>optimize spinal perfusion pressure during thoracic aortic repair is used in some centers but not others. Intraoperative TEE is recommended to guide hemodynamic management, arterial and venous cannulation, and pre- and postrepair evaluation.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>