<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<section epub:type="chapter">
<div id="main_container">
<header>
<h1 id="c01" class="chapter_name"><span class="chapter_name"><a id="page730"></a>34</span></h1>
<h2 class="chapter_title">Anesthesia for the Older Patient</h2>
<p class="author">Douglas A. Rooke, G. Alec Rooke, and Itay Bentov</p>
</header>
<p class="nonindent">Since 1900, the percentage of Americans aged 65 years and older has more than tripled, from 4.1% in 1900 to 15.2% in 2016. In the coming decades, it is expected that older adults will comprise an even larger fraction of the population (<strong><a href="ch034-sec01.xhtml#ff34-1">Figure 34.1</a></strong>). While our patients may live longer, they are not necessarily healthier, as the burden of chronic diseases increases with age. Furthermore, despite the great variability in how age affects an individual, many age-related physiologic changes (such as changes in body composition and reduction in physiological reserve) are common and inescapable.<sup><a href="ch034-sec05.xhtml#bib1">1</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">As of 2018, the US national health expenditure accounted for almost 18% of the gross domestic product, with 21% ($750.2 billion) of the national health budget spent on Medicare.<sup><a href="ch034-sec05.xhtml#bib2">2</a></sup> As impressive as Medicare expenditures may be, federal spending grossly underestimates the total cost of caring for people older than 65 years. One of the challenges for the modern healthcare system is to provide safe yet cost-effective care for this vulnerable population.</p>
<p class="indent">Older adults often suffer from multiple comorbidities, are subject to polypharmacy, and have worse outcomes than young adults. Anesthesia providers should be familiar with clinically relevant aspects of aging to provide appropriate clinical practice modifications to have a positive impact on a susceptible patient&#x2019;s outcome during the vulnerable perioperative period.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">In 1935 when social security began, only 6% of the US population was older than 65 years. Now that value is 16%.</p>
</div>
</div>
</section>
</body>
</html>