<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/jquery.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
<!--<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-1.10.2.min.js'></script>-->
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-migrate-1.2.1.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery.qtip.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/etext.js'></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec250">V. Specific Nonoperating Room Procedures</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen703">A. Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology</h5>
<h6 class="h6"><strong>Angiography</strong></h6>
<p class="nonindent">Angiography causes minimal discomfort and may be performed under local anesthesia with or without light sedation. Lengthy procedures and patients with recent cerebral vascular accidents, depressed levels of consciousness, or raised ICP may necessitate anesthesia with airway protection (tracheal intubation).</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">During interventional procedures, the anesthesiologist may be exposed to as much if not more radiation than the interventional radiologist.</p>
</div>
<h6 class="h6">Interventional Neuroradiology</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Endovascular embolization may be used to treat cerebral aneurysms, arteriovenous malformations, and certain vascular tumors such as meningiomas. The endovascular treatment of acute ischemic stroke is becoming increasingly important with anesthesiologists assuming a vital role in the intraprocedural care of these patients.<sup><a href="#bib8">8</a></sup> General anesthesia and conscious sedation are both suitable techniques for interventional neuroradiology depending on the complexity of the procedure, the need for blood pressure manipulation, and the requirement for neurologic assessment during the procedure.</p>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt39-5"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;39.5</span> Clinical Manifestations of Immediate and Nonimmediate Hypersensitivity Reactions to Radiocontrast Agents</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:50%;"></col>
<col style="width:50%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Immediate Reactions</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Nonimmediate Reactions</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Pruritus</p>
<p class="tbodyleft"><em>Urticaria</em></p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Angioedema/facial edema</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Abdominal pain, nausea, diarrhea</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Rhinitis (sneezing, rhinorrhea)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Hoarseness, cough</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Dyspnea (bronchospasm, laryngeal edema)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Respiratory arrest</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Hypotension, cardiovascular shock</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Cardiac arrest</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft"><em>Pruritus</em></p>
<p class="tbodyleft"><em>Exanthema (mostly macular or maculopapular drug eruption)</em></p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Urticaria, angioedema</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Erythema multiforme minor</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Fixed drug eruption</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Stevens-Johnson syndrome</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Toxic epidermal necrolysis</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Graft-versus-host reaction</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Drug-related eosinophilia with systemic symptoms</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Symmetrical drug-related intertriginous and flexural exanthema</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Vasculitis</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">Note: Most frequent reactions are in italics.</p>
</div>
<a id="page828"></a>
<h6 class="h6">Radiofrequency Ablation</h6>
<p class="nonindent">CT-guided percutaneous radiofrequency ablation (RFA) is carried out for treatment of primary and metastatic tumors in solid organs. One-lung ventilation and high-frequency jet ventilation may be used in patients for RFA of liver tumors to minimize motion associated with diaphragm excursions from standard ventilation.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Transjugular Intrahepatic Portosystemic Shunt</h6>
<p class="nonindent">A transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) procedure is carried out using fluoroscopy and is performed to help alleviate portal hypertension in patients with advanced cirrhosis. The procedure may be performed under sedation or general anesthesia. Patients presenting for a TIPS procedure, in general, have significant hepatic dysfunction and require careful preoperative assessment and intraoperative management.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen704">B. Radiation Therapy</h5>
<p class="nonindent">External beam radiation is a common treatment for children with malignancies (<strong><a href="#tt39-6">Table 39.6</a></strong>).<sup><a href="#bib9">9</a></sup> The doses of radiation used are very high, and all personnel must leave the room during the treatment. An interfaced system of closed-circuit television, telemetric microphones, and standard monitoring is used to allow close observation of the patient during the procedure. Complete absence of movement is crucial during radiation therapy and general anesthesia or deep sedation techniques, with propofol the anesthetic of choice during these procedures.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Transcatheter aortic valve implantation or replacement allows replacement of the aortic valve percutaneously in the CCL. High-risk patients who are too sick for open-heart surgery may be treated successfully.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen705">C. Interventional Cardiology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Diagnostic and therapeutic interventional procedures are carried out in the <strong><em>CCL</em></strong> and <strong><em>EPL</em></strong>. These procedures are outlined in <strong><a href="ch039-sec01.xhtml#tt39-2">Table 39.2</a></strong>. Light or moderate sedation is commonly used under supervision of the cardiologist. However, general anesthesia is increasingly required for more lengthy and complex procedures, especially structural heart procedures.<sup><a href="#bib10">10</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Electrophysiologic studies (EPS) and ablation of abnormal conduction pathways are performed for the treatment of dysrhythmias caused by aberrant conduction pathways. EPS are lengthy and can cause discomfort, especially when intraoperative dysrhythmias are provoked by the procedure and then terminated using overdrive pacing, or if unsuccessful, by external cardioversion. Anesthetic agents including volatile agents and muscle relaxants may interfere with ablation procedures; thus, communication with the proceduralists is of great importance in planning anesthesia for these procedures.<sup><a href="#bib11">11</a></sup> The ability to move the patient rapidly to the operating room and the availability of cardiopulmonary bypass are essential backups for CCL and EPL procedures.</p>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt39-6"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;39.6</span> Common Radiosensitive Tumors in Children</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Primary CNS tumor: neuroblastoma, medulloblastoma</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Acute leukemia: CNS leukemia</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Ocular tumors: retinoblastoma</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Intra-abdominal tumors: Wilms tumor</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Rhabdomyosarcoma</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Other tumors: Langerhans cell histiocytosis</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">CNS, central nervous system.</p>
</div>
<a id="page829"></a>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen706">D. Cardioversion</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Transthoracic cardioversion is commonly used electively to treat dysrhythmias, especially atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter. Cardioversion takes a few seconds; however, it is distressing and painful. Therefore, deep sedation is used except in life-threatening situations. A small bolus of intravenous induction agent such as propofol or etomidate is usually sufficient for the procedure.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen707">E. Nonoperating Room Pediatric Cardiac Procedures</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Cardiac catheterization is performed in children with congenital heart disease for both hemodynamic assessment and interventional procedures. These children are often very sick and may present with cyanosis, dyspnea, congestive heart failure, and intracardiac shunts. In patients with a patent ductus arteriosus, high oxygen tension can lead to premature closure, and prostaglandin infusions are often used to maintain duct patency.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Pay meticulous attention to preventing air bubbles entering intravenous lines shunts in children with right-to-left shunts because they may cross to the arterial circulation, causing stroke or cardiac arrest.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen708">F. Gastroenterology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Procedures commonly performed in the gastrointestinal endoscopy suite are outlined in <strong><a href="ch039-sec01.xhtml#tt39-2">Table 39.2</a></strong>. The majority of these procedures may be performed with light sedation (commonly fentanyl and midazolam or propofol infusion) without the involvement of an anesthesiologist.</p>
<p class="indent">Gastroenterologists, however, universally agree that patients in ASA classes III and IV who are undergoing complex procedures or have histories of adverse or inadequate responses to light or moderate sedation require the care of an anesthesiologist.<sup><a href="#bib12">12</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">The patient&#x2019;s condition, the position of the patient, and the specific procedure determine the anesthetic technique to be used. Local anesthetic may be sprayed into the oropharynx to facilitate passage of the endoscope, although this may abolish the gag reflex and increase the risk of aspiration. High-flow nasal oxygenation (HFNO) is a newer oxygenation technique that may be used in sedated patients. Under general anesthesia, patients usually require tracheal intubation to protect the proximal airway, which is shared with the endoscope during the procedure, although laryngeal mask airways have also been used.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen709">G. Electroconvulsive Therapy</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) has been used in the management of severe depression, mania, and affective disorders. Patients typically undergo a series of regular treatments (three times a week for 6-12 treatments, followed by weekly or monthly maintenance). The procedures are usually performed in the postanesthesia care unit, where there is close access to anesthesia support service. Alternatively, they may be performed in the psychiatric unit where anesthesia services are not so readily available. ECT is distressing and possibly dangerous because generalized convulsions may result in limb injuries and significant cardiovascular reactions may occur. Light general anesthesia with muscle relaxation, usually provided with the short-acting muscle relaxant succinylcholine, is used to mitigate the unpleasant effects of a generalized seizure. The anesthesiologist should be aware of the patient&#x2019;s medication regimes because drug interactions between anesthetic agents and psychotropic medications, particularly monoamine oxidase inhibitors, may occur. Skillful airway management using bag and mask ventilation is usually sufficient to maintain oxygenation during anesthesia for ECT.</p>
<a id="page830"></a>
<p class="BIBLIOGRAPHYpTitle">References</p>
<ol class="ref"><li id="bib1">Nagrebetsky A, Gabriel RA, Dutton RP, Urman RD. Growth of nonoperating room anesthesia care in the United States: a contemporary trends analysis. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2017;124:1261-1267. PMID: 27918331.</li>
<li id="bib2">Chang B, Urman RD. Non-operating room anesthesia: the principles of patient assessment and preparation. <em>Anesthesiol Clin</em>. 2016;34:223-240. PMID: 26927750.</li>
<li id="bib3">American Society of Anesthesiologists Committee on Standards and Practice Parameters. <em>Statement on Nonoperating Room Anesthetizing Locations</em>. 2018. Accessed March 12, 2020. <a href="https://www.asahq.org/standards-and-guidelines/statement-on-nonoperating-room-anesthetizing-locations">https://www.asahq.org/standards-and-guidelines/statement-on-nonoperating-room-anesthetizing-locations</a></li>
<li id="bib4">American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Sedation and Analgesia by Non-Anesthesiologists. Practice guidelines for sedation and analgesia by non-anesthesiologists. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2002;96:1004-1017. PMID: 11964611.</li>
<li id="bib5">Woodward ZG, Urman RD, Domino KB. Safety of non-operating room anesthesia: a closed claims update. <em>Anesthesiol Clin</em>. 2017;35(4):569-658. PMID: 29101947.</li>
<li id="bib6">Miller DL, Va&#x00F1;&#x00F3; E, Bartal G, et al. Occupational radiation protection in interventional radiology: a joint guideline of the Cardiovascular and Interventional Radiology Society of Europe and the Society of interventional Radiology. <em>Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol</em>. 2010;33:230-239. PMID: 20020300.</li>
<li id="bib7">Deen J, Vandevivere Y, Van de Putte P. Challenges in the anesthetic management of ambulatory patients in the MRI suites. <em>Curr Opin Anesthesiol</em>. 2017;30:670-675. PMID: 28817401.</li>
<li id="bib8">Rasmussen LK, Simonsen CZ, Rasmussen M. Anesthesia practice for endovascular therapy of acute ischemic stroke in Europe. <em>Curr Opin Anaesthesiol</em>. 2019;32:523-530. PMID: 31045592.</li>
<li id="bib9">McFadyen GJ, Pelly N, Orr RJ. Sedation and anesthesia for the pediatric patient undergoing radiotherapy. <em>Curr Opin Anaesthesiol</em>. 2011;24:433-438. PMID: 21602675.</li>
<li id="bib10">Fiorilli PN, Anwaruddin S, Zhou E, Shah R. Catheterization laboratory. Structural heart disease, devices, and transcatheter aortic valve replacement. <em>Anesthesiol Clin</em>. 2017;35:627-639. PMID: 29101953.</li>
<li id="bib11">Mandel JE, Stevenson WG, Frankel DS. Anesthesia in the electrophysiology laboratory. <em>Anesthesiol Clin</em>. 2017;35:641-654. PMID: 29101954.</li>
<li id="bib12">Kuzhively J, Pandit JJ. Anesthesia and airway management for gastrointestinal endoscopic procedures outside the operating room. <em>Curr Opin Anaesthesiol</em>. 2019;32:517-522. PMID: 31082826.</li></ol>
<a id="page831"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp39_1" onclick="openLinkInNewTab('https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_caf/39_NORA/story.html')">Infographic 39.1 A Closer Look at Hypersensitivity Reactions <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<a id="page832"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp39_2" onclick="openLinkInNewTab('https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/39A_Postoperative_Recovery/index.html')">Interactive Video Lecture 39a. Postoperative Recovery <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<a id="page833"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp39_3" onclick="openLinkInNewTab('https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/39B_Postoperative_Recovery/index.html')">Interactive Video Lecture 39b. Postoperative Recovery <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>