<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec226">I. Coronary Artery Disease</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Coronary artery disease (CAD) is one of the most common causes of death in highly developed nations. It results from the buildup of atherosclerotic lesions in the coronary arteries. Myocardial ischemia is a hallmark of CAD. It is caused by an imbalance between myocardial oxygen supply and demand. The anesthesiologist must understand the determinants of this delicate relation and avoid myocardial injury by minimizing myocardial oxygen demand while optimizing myocardial oxygen delivery.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen636">A. Myocardial Oxygen Demand</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Systolic wall tension, contractility, and heart rate are the primary determinants of myocardial oxygen demand. <strong><em>Wall tension</em></strong> is directly proportional to systolic blood pressure and chamber size (preload) and inversely proportional to wall thickness. Thus, increases in preload increase wall tension exponentially because as chamber size increases, ventricular wall thickness must thin to accommodate the additional volume. Increases in <strong><em>heart rate</em></strong> are especially deleterious because increases in heart rate increase oxygen demand directly and decrease oxygen delivery indirectly by shortening diastole. The left ventricle (LV) receives its coronary blood flow only during diastole. Thus, increases in wall tension, <strong><em>contractility</em></strong>, and heart rate above normal resting levels must be avoided in patients with CAD.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen637">B. Myocardial Oxygen Supply</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The two main factors contributing to myocardial oxygen supply are arterial <strong><em>oxygen content</em></strong> and <strong><em>coronary blood flow</em></strong>. Recall that arterial oxygen content is represented by the formula:</p>
<p class="center">O<sub>2</sub> content = (hemoglobin) (1.34) (% saturation) + (0.003) (PO<sub>2</sub>).</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">The left ventricle receives its blood flow only during diastole, while the right ventricle is perfused throughout the cardiac cycle.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">Because hemoglobin levels and blood volume are usually adequately maintained during cardiac surgery, coronary blood flow is the most critical factor in maintaining myocardial oxygen supply. Coronary blood flow is directly related to coronary perfusion pressure and inversely related to coronary vascular resistance and heart rate (time for perfusion in diastole). <strong><em>Coronary perfusion pressure</em></strong> is estimated as the difference between systemic (aortic) diastolic pressure and left ventricular diastolic pressure. In normal hearts, coronary blood flow is autoregulated for systolic blood pressures between 50 and 150&#x00A0;mm Hg. In patients with CAD, the area of the heart most at risk for ischemia is the subendocardium of the LV. The right ventricle (RV) is perfused during the entire cardiac cycle due to its low intracavitary pressure. Thus, low left ventricular diastolic pressure, normal systemic diastolic pressure, and low heart rate improve myocardial oxygen supply.</p>
<a id="page768"></a>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt36-1"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;36.1</span> Treatment of Intraoperative Ischemia</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:40%;"></col>
<col style="width:60%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Clinical Manifestation</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft">&#x00A0;</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2" class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Increased demand</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">&#x2191; HR</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Treat usual reasons, beta-blocker</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">&#x2191; BP</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">&#x2191; anesthetic depth</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">&#x2191; PCWP</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Nitroglycerin</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2" class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Decreased supply</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">&#x2193; HR</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Atropine, pacing</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">&#x2193; BP</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">&#x2193; anesthetic depth, vasoconstrictor</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">&#x2191; PCWP</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Nitroglycerin, inotrope</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>No changes</strong></p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Nitroglycerin, calcium channel blockers, ? heparin</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">&#x2191;, increase; &#x2193;, decrease; HR, heart rate; BP, blood pressure; PCWP, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure.</p>
<p class="u_tfoot">From Skubas NJ, Lichtman AD, Wang CJ, Sharma A, Thomas SJ. Anesthesia for cardiac surgery. In: Barash PG, Cahalan MK, Cullen BF, et al, eds. <em>Clinical Anesthesia</em>. 8th ed. Wolters Kluwer; 2018:1077-1111, <a href="ch039-sec01.xhtml#tt39-2">Table 39.2</a>.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen638">C. Monitoring for Ischemia</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Flat or downsloping <strong><em>ST segment</em></strong> depression &#x2265;0.1&#x00A0;mV on the electrocardiogram (ECG) is the most reliable ECG sign of myocardial ischemia. However, transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) has been shown to detect myocardial ischemia earlier and more frequently than the ECG and is very often used in cardiac surgery. Pulmonary artery catheters may reveal acute increases in left atrial pressures associated with ischemia-induced stiffening of the LV. However, the pulmonary artery catheter is neither a sensitive nor specific monitor for myocardial ischemia because so many other things influence left atrial pressure during surgery.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen639">D. Treatment of Ischemia</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Myocardial ischemia may occur at any time during coronary bypass surgery. The treatment depends largely on the etiology and can be seen in <strong><a href="#tt36-1">Table 36.1</a></strong>. Thorough review of the pharmacologic effects of nitrates, peripheral vasoconstrictors, calcium channel blockers, and beta-blockers can be found in <a href="ch013.xhtml">Chapter 13</a>.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>