<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec197">IV. Anesthesia for Cesarean Delivery</h4>
<p class="nonindent">In the United States, 32% of babies are born via cesarean delivery,<sup><a href="ch031-sec09.xhtml#bib6">6</a></sup> and recently an increase in the rate of vaginal birth after cesarean delivery has been observed, especially in younger aged women.<sup><a href="ch031-sec09.xhtml#bib7">7</a></sup> Most cesarean deliveries are performed under neuraxial anesthesia, via either spinal, epidural, or CSE anesthesia.</p>
<p class="indent"><strong><em>Elective</em></strong> cesarean deliveries are performed at term (&#x2265;39&#x00A0;weeks), under <strong><em>neuraxial</em></strong> anesthesia unless there is a contraindication, because the risk to both mother and fetus is lower with neuraxial versus general anesthesia. In preparation for surgery, patients are instructed not to eat solids for 8 hours prior to surgery and not to drink clear fluids for 2 hours prior to surgery. Preoperative labs may include a complete blood count and type and screen. An 18-gauge or larger peripheral intravenous line is placed, and balanced salt solution is administered.</p>
<p class="indent">Pfannenstiel skin incision with low transverse uterine incision is the most common type of operative approach. To provide adequate anesthesia for cesarean delivery, blockade must include both incisional or somatic and peritoneal pain fibers up to the celiac plexus. Therefore, a dermatomal block from at least T6 to sacrum is required. Anesthesia care providers commonly employ either spinal or epidural anesthesia to achieve this level.</p>
<p class="indent">Spinal bupivacaine (10-12&#x00A0;mg) or lidocaine (60-100&#x00A0;mg) represents viable options for cesarean delivery anesthesia. Intrathecal lidocaine spinal has become less popular due to concern about transient neurologic symptoms. The <a id="page659"></a>anesthesiologist commonly administers short-acting and long-acting intrathecal opioids along with the local anesthetic. Typically fentanyl (10-20&#x00A0;&#x03BC;g) or sufentanil (2.5-5&#x00A0;&#x03BC;g) is given. The duration of either is 2 hours, and intraoperative pain, nausea, and vomiting occur less frequently when they are used. Long-acting hydrophilic morphine provides postoperative analgesia.</p>
<p class="indent">Hypotension commonly accompanies initiation of spinal anesthesia for cesarean delivery and can be prevented or lessened by placing the patient in 15&#x00B0; to 30&#x00B0; of left uterine displacement and administering a co-load of crystalloid 10 to 20&#x00A0;mL/kg or colloid 5&#x00A0;mL/kg. However, this degree of uterine displacement is difficult to achieve. Administration of crystalloid with prophylactic phenylephrine infusion titrated to maintain baseline blood pressure decreases the incidence of spinal-related hypotension, nausea, vomiting, and results in no significant difference in umbilical cord gas values when compared to LUD.<sup><a href="ch031-sec09.xhtml#bib8">8</a></sup> Nausea is common after initiation of spinal anesthesia and may be related to hypotension or to increased vagal tone from sympathectomy.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Nausea is common after initiation of spinal anesthesia and may be related to hypotension or to increased vagal tone from sympathectomy.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent"><strong><em>Epidural anesthesia for cesarean delivery</em></strong> is achieved via 2% lidocaine or 3% chloroprocaine, 15 to 25&#x00A0;mL, incrementally dosed in nonemergency situations. In emergency situations, 3% 2-chloroprocaine 20&#x00A0;mL is preferred because it has the shortest onset time (3-4 minutes) and desirable maternal and fetal safety profiles. Of note, chloroprocaine may decrease the efficacy of opioids and local anesthetics administered subsequently. The addition of sodium bicarbonate will decrease time to blockade by converting more of the local anesthetic to its nonionized form. The dose is typically 1 mEq/10&#x00A0;mL local anesthetic volume. Epinephrine (5&#x00A0;&#x03BC;g/mL) can be added to increase the density and extend the duration of block and to test dose a labor epidural catheter that will be used for cesarean delivery anesthesia. Preservative-free morphine can be given via the epidural catheter for postoperative analgesia, typically after umbilical cord clamping.</p>
<p class="indent"><strong><em>General anesthesia for cesarean delivery</em></strong> is generally reserved for emergency cases or when contraindications to neuraxial anesthesia exist. Standard of care requires American Society of Anesthesiologists&#x2019; (ASA) standard monitors and preoxygenation. Proper positioning and preoxygenation help mitigate the desaturation that occurs, and they assume special importance in pregnant patients who are particularly prone to desaturation after a period of apnea. Administration of a nonparticulate antacid and rapid sequence induction and intubation, with an assistant providing cricoid pressure, are also standard, due to the increased risk of aspiration. The surgeon prepares and drapes the patient&#x2019;s abdomen prior to induction of anesthesia to be ready to perform surgery immediately after endotracheal tube placement is confirmed. Induction was historically with thiopental; however, propofol has replaced thiopental as the induction agent of choice, mainly because of its availability. Succinylcholine (1&#x00A0;mg/kg) given with induction provides muscle relaxation. Once the trachea is intubated, the anesthesiologist notifies the obstetrician and surgery begins.</p>
<p class="indent">Temperature monitoring and stomach decompression with an orogastric tube are generally recommended. Oxygen and inhaled anesthetic are administered until delivery of the fetus. Inhaled anesthetic over 1 MAC may decrease uterine tone, so after delivery of the fetus, a nitrous oxygen mixture is started, along with low-concentration inhaled anesthetic. An analgesic, amnestic, and sometimes additional muscle relaxant are given. After delivery of the placenta, an oxytocin infusion is started, and additional uterotonics are given as needed.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen519">A. <a id="page660"></a>Postoperative Analgesia</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Intrathecal or epidural morphine provides long lasting analgesia and appears to have a ceiling effect around 150&#x00A0;&#x03BC;g (intrathecal) and 3 to 4&#x00A0;mg (epidural).<sup><a href="ch031-sec09.xhtml#bib9">9</a>,<a href="ch031-sec09.xhtml#bib10">10</a></sup> Higher doses do not increase analgesia and cause more nausea, respiratory depression, and pruritus. Peak morphine effects occur about 6 hours postadministration and cease by 12 to 18 hours postadministration. Published ASA recommendations call for monitoring of sedation and respiratory rate every hour during the first 12 hours and every 2 hours for the next 12 hours after dosing.<sup><a href="ch031-sec09.xhtml#bib11">11</a></sup> Medications to treat side effects include naloxone to treat respiratory depression or sedation, a mixed opiate agonist-antagonist to treat pruritus, and an intravenous antiemetic. Oral analgesics should be ordered, such as acetaminophen and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Additional opiates may be administered if needed, as long as vigilant monitoring takes place. Prophylaxis with an intraoperative dose of antiemetic decreases the incidence of nausea and vomiting associated with neuraxial morphine. Alternatively, the anesthesiologist may leave the epidural catheter in place and administer PCEA with low-concentration local anesthetic and lipid-soluble opioid, typically for 24 hours postdelivery.</p>
<p class="indent">For patients who do not receive neuraxial morphine or PCEA, transversus abdominis plane (TAP) blocks improve analgesia by decreasing incisional pain. TAP blocks may be performed immediately postoperatively with ultrasound guidance, typically with 10- to 15-mL long-acting local anesthetic per side.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>