<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec237">IV. Organ Protection in Vascular Surgery</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Many vascular procedures involve the occlusion of blood flow through the application of clamps, shunts (providing flow at a lower perfusion pressure), or bypasses (directing flow from a well-perfused region to a poorly perfused region). Therefore, vital organs may suffer ischemia for varying durations.</p>
<p class="video"><video data-id="fl5Xatjo" controls="controls" class="jwp-video" crossorigin="anonymous" style="width:100%; height:auto; width:320px; height:240px;">Browser issues</video></p>
<p class="video1" id="vid37-1"><strong>VIDEO 37.1</strong></p>
<p class="video2"><strong>Carotid Shunting</strong></p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen661">A. Ischemia-Reperfusion Injury in the Patient Undergoing Vascular Surgery: Fundamental Concepts</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Reduction or interruption of blood flow (ischemia) compromises delivery of oxygen, glucose, and other essential nutrients for aerobic metabolism and thus slows the generation of adenosine triphosphate. When adenosine triphosphate is fully depleted, cellular processes fail and cellular integrity is lost (ischemic injury). The duration of ischemia correlates directly with the degree of cellular injury. In addition, toxic metabolites of <strong><em>anaerobic metabolism</em></strong> accumulate in the low or no-flow regions during the ischemic period. Upon restoration of flow and resumption of delivery of nutrients, further damage occurs via generation of toxic oxygen species, release of cytotoxic amino acids, upregulation of nitric oxide synthase, and initiation of cellular apoptosis. In addition, toxic by-products of anaerobic metabolism are released into the systemic circulation, causing electrolyte abnormalities, labile blood pressures, alterations in systemic vascular resistance, and potentially severe acid-base disequilibrium.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen662">B. Prevention of Myocardial Injury</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Vascular surgery can result in dramatic changes in blood pressure, especially during procedures requiring <strong><em>aortic clamping</em></strong>. (See <a href="ch036.xhtml">Chapter 36</a> for further discussion of myocardial oxygen supply and demand as well as techniques for monitoring and treating myocardial ischemia.)</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen663">C. Prevention of Kidney Injury</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Postoperative <strong><em>acute renal failure (ARF)</em></strong> results in an increased length of hospital stay, as well as significant morbidity and mortality. Underlying kidney disease, cardiac disease, and especially renal ischemia contribute to its development: suprarenal aortic cross-clamping 15% and infrarenal cross-clamping 5% incidence of ARF. Additional risk factors may include advanced age, hypovolemia, and anemia. Logically, minimizing renal ischemia time and maintaining appropriate hemodynamics are important to preserving renal function. However, currently there is no clinically proven strategy to minimize the risk of postoperative renal insufficiency and ARF.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen664">D. <a id="page789"></a>Prevention of Pulmonary Complications</h5>
<p class="nonindent">More and more vascular procedures are done via minimally invasive or endovascular techniques for which postoperative pulmonary complications should be minimal. However, for patients who require open surgical procedures, especially aortic procedures, significant pulmonary complications are a real risk due to <strong><em>large fluid shifts</em></strong> and <strong><em>transfusion-related acute lung injury</em></strong>. In addition, pain from large incisions can compromise respirations and cough. Different centers manage these challenges differently; however, minimizing transfusions and optimizing postoperative analgesia are established ways of improving outcome. After carotid endarterectomy (CEA), the carotid body on the operative side is denervated, and this blunts the ventilatory response to hypoxemia and virtually eliminates this response after bilateral CEA. Postoperative surgical site bleeding after CEA can distort, compress, or occlude the trachea rapidly, necessitating emergent evacuation of the causative hematoma.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">The most urgent and potentially devastating complication of carotid endarterectomy is clot formation at the surgical site and the associated thromboembolism to the cerebral circulation.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen665">E. Protection of the Central Nervous System and Spinal Cord</h5>
<p class="nonindent">In patients undergoing vascular surgery, neurologic injury is most common after CEA (<strong><em>stroke</em></strong>) and thoracic aortic procedures <strong><em>(paraplegia)</em></strong>. During CEA, emboli from the surgical site are the usual cause of stroke. However, hypoperfusion of the brain on the operative side can result during carotid clamping if the patient&#x2019;s perfusion via the circle of Willis or the surgical shunt around the site of carotid clamping is inadequate. In thoracic aortic procedures, compromise of the spinal cord vascular supply, especially the artery of Adamkiewicz, is a major risk. For strategies to improve neurologic outcome, please see subsequent chapters on the specific procedures (<strong><a href="ch037-sec05.xhtml#ff37-3">Figure 37.3</a></strong>). Unfortunately, no pharmacologic intervention has proven beneficial.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Endovascular repair of aortic aneurysms has evolved into a first-line treatment choice.</p>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>