<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec187"><a id="page630"></a>IV. Monitoring</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen478">A. CNS Function</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The most important monitor of CNS function is the awake and responsive patient who can be neurologically examined. Rarely, neurosurgery can be performed with an awake patient. Under general anesthesia, however, other modes of monitoring the CNS are necessary. <strong><em>Electrophysiologic (evoked potential) monitoring</em></strong> is commonly used in the operating room to assess the functional integrity of the CNS during surgeries that might put CNS structures at risk.<sup><a href="ch030-sec10.xhtml#bib1">1</a></sup> The most commonly used modalities of evoked potential monitoring are <strong><em>somatosensory-evoked potentials (SSEPs), motor-evoked potentials (MEPs), and electromyography (EMG)</em></strong>, with brainstem auditory-evoked potentials and visual-evoked potentials being less commonly used.</p>
<p class="indent">SSEPs are elicited from a peripheral nerve (eg, median, ulnar, posterior tibial) and usually measured at the level of the subcortex and cortex. This modality is especially useful for monitoring the integrity of the dorsal columns of the spinal cord and the sensory cortex of the brain, where sensory fibers travel. MEPs are produced at the level of the cortex by direct or indirect stimulation and measured as compound muscle action potentials at the muscular level. MEPs are useful for assessing the motor cortex and the anterior spinal cord (corticospinal tracts) during surgeries that may put these structures at risk. EMG is a monitor that continuously assesses distinct nerve or nerve root integrity, either spontaneously or through elicited current, and is sensitive to mechanical and thermal damage to these structures.</p>
<p class="indent">Other monitoring modalities used to monitor the CNS (see section that follows) include transcranial Doppler ultrasonography, raw and processed electroencephalography (EEG), cerebral oximetry, and functional magnetic resonance imaging, among others.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen479">B. Influence of Anesthetic Technique</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Anesthetic drugs play a major role in determining how successfully these neuromonitoring modalities can be employed. Potent volatile anesthetics have the greatest inhibitory effect (decreased amplitude, increased latency) on obtaining robust evoked potential signals (SSEPs and MEPs). This is done in a dose-dependent fashion, especially as related to MEPs. Their effect on EMG is minimal. Nitrous oxide decreases signal amplitude with little effect on latency. Intravenous anesthetics have much less effect on SSEPs, MEPs, and EMG, but high doses of propofol can depress these signals. Etomidate and ketamine may increase the amplitude of SSEPs, whereas opioids generally have very little effect on evoked potentials. Neuromuscular blocking drugs inhibit MEPs and EMG by directly acting at the neuromuscular junction but often will improve SSEPs by removing myogenic interference.<sup><a href="ch030-sec10.xhtml#bib2">2</a></sup></p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>