<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec289">I. Wellness and the Anesthesiologist</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Wellness is personal; therefore, a single definition is elusive. Of diverse cultural and spiritual backgrounds, anesthesiologists operate in a high-stress environment physically, mentally, and emotionally. They are colleagues at different life stages, and therefore, &#x201C;wellness&#x201D; means something entirely different to each. Compare the 29-year-old residency graduate in her second year of marriage, starting a family, and paying down medical school debt while learning how to become an autonomous physician and teacher, with the 63-year-old seasoned practitioner celebrating her first grandchild while contemplating retirement, her own health, and the illness or death of a parent. Here the commonality of wellness is defined as the collective thought processes, behaviors, values, and attitudes that lead to increased resilience, decreased burnout, an enhanced sense of well-being, and improved job and life satisfaction. Given that wellness is a multivariate, complex, and personal state of being, it is not the purpose of this chapter to provide a formulaic guide to wellness, but rather, a summary of wellness issues specific to the anesthesiologist, the practice of anesthesiology, and to leaders within anesthesiology-related organizations.</p>
<p class="video"><video data-id="Xr7mafxd" controls="controls" class="jwp-video" crossorigin="anonymous" style="width:100%; height:auto; width:320px; height:240px;">Browser issues</video></p>
<p class="video1" id="vid45-1"><strong>VIDEO 45.1</strong></p>
<p class="video2"><strong>Wellness Principles</strong></p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Wellness is a complex and personal state of being, defined by the collective thought processes, values, and attitudes that lead to increased resilience, decreased burnout, and an enhanced sense of well-being, including job and life satisfaction.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">Several organizations have identified wellness as a group of competencies to be achieved during training. The Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada lists &#x201C;Demonstrate a commitment to physician health and sustainable practice&#x201D; as the third competency of professionalism in their 2015 framework.<sup><a href="ch045-sec06.xhtml#bib1">1</a></sup> The American Board of Anesthesiology, as part of its Milestones project, designated the &#x201C;Responsibility to maintain personal emotional, physical, and mental health&#x201D; as a required component of professionalism in the certification process.</p>
<p class="indent">Although a definition of wellness remains nebulous, the concept of burnout is well established. The &#x201C;burnout syndrome&#x201D; gained attention in the 1970s and 1980s, when Maslach et al<sup><a href="ch045-sec06.xhtml#bib2">2</a></sup> developed and marketed the &#x201C;Maslach Burnout Inventory&#x201D; (MBI). They defined <strong><em>burnout</em></strong> as &#x201C;a syndrome of emotional exhaustion and cynicism that occurs frequently among individuals who do &#x2018;people <a id="page926"></a>work&#x2019; of some kind.&#x201D; The MBI characterizes burnout based on three major psychological characteristics: <strong><em>emotional exhaustion, depersonalization</em></strong>, and a <strong><em>low sense of personal accomplishment</em></strong>. The MBI has since become the gold standard in quantifying burnout.</p>
<p class="indent">In 1999, in response to a growing body of literature concerning higher rates of suicide, substance abuse, and depression among anesthesiologists, Jackson contemplated the role of stress, closely examining aspects such as personality type, physical implications of stress, life cycle changes, sex stress differences, self-esteem, and workplace stress abatement.<sup><a href="ch045-sec06.xhtml#bib3">3</a></sup> He defined stress as the &#x201C;nonspecific adaptive response of the body to any change, demand, pressure, challenge, threat, or trauma&#x201D; and related this to the particular stressors encountered within the practice of anesthesiology. Jackson offered that a humanistic approach to medical education, coupled with the teaching of stress management techniques, could improve the overall professional and personal lives of anesthesiologists. Following this, a body of literature has reported the epidemiology and impact of burnout in the larger community of physicians (<strong><a href="#tt45-1">Table 45.1</a></strong>).</p>
<p class="indent">The 2020 Medscape Lifestyle Report, based on the surveyed responses of over 150,000 physicians, reported a nationwide burnout rate of 42% (anesthesiologists 41%). Generation X physicians (born between mid-1960s and early 1980s) reported a 10% higher rate of burnout, and female physicians (all specialties averaged) were more likely to experience burnout than their male colleagues (48% compared to 37%). A recent investigation revealed 44.7% of non-Hispanic White physicians, 41.7% of non-Hispanic Asian physicians, 38.5% of non-Hispanic Black physicians, and 37.4% of Hispanic/Latinx physicians report burnout.<sup><a href="ch045-sec06.xhtml#bib4">4</a></sup> Anesthesiologists ranked 7 of 23 medical specialties in burnout among physicians. Of all respondents, 38% screened positive for depression and 6% reported suicidal ideations within the past 12&#x00A0;months.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">In one large national study, physicians reported higher burnout rates than the average high school graduate, whereas those with nonmedical graduate degrees reported lower burnout rates than the average high school graduate.</p>
</div>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt45-1"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;45.1</span> Physician Burnout: Causes, Consequences, and Epidemiology</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:30%;"></col>
<col style="width:30%;"></col>
<col style="width:40%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Study</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Methods and Focus</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Findings</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Shanafelt TD, Balch CM, Bechamps G, et al. Burnout and medical errors among American surgeons. <em>Ann Surg</em>. 2010;251:995-1000.</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Survey of 7905 ACS members. MBI, QOL, and depression screens</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="U_TbBL1">32% response rate.</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1">8.9% reporting a major medical error in past 3&#x00A0;mo, with 70% citing individual, not systems, errors.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Dyrbye LN, Massie FS, Eacker A, et al. Relationship between burnout and professional conduct and attitudes among US medical students. <em>J Am Med Assoc</em>. 2010;304:1173-1180.</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Survey of medical students at seven US medical schools. MBI, PRIME-MD depression screen, QOL survey</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="U_TbBL1">61% response rate.</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1">52.8% incidence of burnout.</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Unprofessional behavior more common among students with burnout.</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Burnout associated with lower rates of altruistic views.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Balch CM, Shanafelt TD, Sloan JA, et al. Distress and career satisfaction among 14 surgical specialties, comparing academic and private practice settings. <em>Ann Surg</em>. 2011;254:558-568.</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">14 surgical specialties from ACS data&#x2014;demographics, career satisfaction, distress parameters</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Academic surgeons less likely to experience burnout, depression, or suicidal ideation and more likely to have career satisfaction.</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Academic burnout associations: Negative (older children, pediatric surgery, cardiothoracic surgery, male); positive (trauma surgery, nights on call, hours worked).</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Private practice burnout associations: Negative (older children, physician spouse, older age); positive (urologic surgery, 31%-50% nonclinical time, incentive-based pay, nights on call, hours worked).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Shanafelt TD, Boone S, Tan L, et al. Burnout and satisfaction with work-life balance among US physicians relative to the general US population. <em>Arch Intern Med</em>. 2012;172:1377-1385.</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Survey of 27,276 US physicians from AMA Physician Masterfile, compared with probability-based sample of the general US population. MBI</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="U_TbBL1">26.7% response rate.</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1">45.8% with at least one symptom of burnout.</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;More common in physicians than in the average high school graduate.</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Burnout most common in emergency medicine and general internal medicine (anesthesiology was seventh of 23 specialties listed).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">West, CP, Dyrbye, LN, Sinsky, C, et al. Resilience and burnout among physicians and the general US working population. <em>JAMA Netw Open.</em> 2020;3(7):e209385. doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.9385</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Survey of 5445 physicians and a probability-based sample of 5198 individuals in the US working population.</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="U_TbBL1">17.9% response rate.</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Mean resilience scores 3.8% higher in physicians.</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Physicians without burnout had higher resilience scores.</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1">29% of physicians with the highest resilience scores still reported burnout.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Marshall A, Dyrbye L, Shanafelt T, et al. Disparities in burnout and satisfaction with work&#x2013;life integration in U.S. physicians by gender and practice setting. <em>Acad Med.</em> 2020;95:1435-1443.</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">30,456 physicians were invited to participate; 5445 (17.9%) completed the survey</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Female physicians reported a higher but not statistically significant prevalence of burnout than male physicians in both Academic and Private Practice.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Dyrbye L, Burke S, Hardeman R, et al. Association of clinical specialty with symptoms of burnout and career choice regret among us resident physicians. <em>J Am Med Assoc.</em> 2018;320(11):1114-1130.</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Of 4696 resident physicians, 3588 (76.4%) completed the questionnaire during the second year of residency.</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="U_TbBL1">45.2% reported symptoms of burnout.</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Career choice regret was reported by 14.1%.</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Characteristics associated with higher risk of symptoms of burnout included female sex, risk difference, and higher levels of anxiety during medical school.</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;A high level of empathy during medical school was associated with a lower risk of symptoms of burnout during residency.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">West CP, Dyrbye LN, Sinsky C, et al. Resilience and burnout among physicians and the general US working population. <em>JAMA Netw Open</em>. 2020;3(7):e209385. doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.9385</p></td>
<td class="td2">&#x00A0;</td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Higher rates of resilience in physicians than the general population.</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Concomitant high resilience with high burnout in many physicians.</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Myth that resilience training is the antidote to burnout dispelled.</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">ACS, American College of Surgeons; AMA, American Medical Association; MBI, Maslach Burnout Inventory; PRIME-MD, Primary Care Evaluation of Mental Disorders; QOL, quality of life.</p>
</div>
<a id="page927"></a><a id="page928"></a>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>