<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec265">XV. Hypothermia and Hyperthermia</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Intraoperatively, many patients are at risk for hypothermia largely due to impaired thermoregulation due to anesthetic medications, cold operating rooms, cold resuscitation fluids, and significant surgical exposure. Forced air warmers and other convection devices reduce this risk, but hypothermia is still a common problem in<a id="page848"></a> the PACU. Hypothermia is associated with significant risks, including increased bleeding, infection, myocardial ischemia, altered drug metabolism, longer PACU stays, and decreased patient comfort and satisfaction. Shivering significantly increases oxygen consumption and CO<sub>2</sub> production, leading to increased work of breathing and increasing the risk of respiratory failure. Hypothermia should be aggressively corrected with warming blankets and raising ambient temperature when possible. Meperidine can be used to treat shivering, although patients should be monitored for sedation and respiratory depression.</p>
<p class="indent">Conversely, hyperthermia in PACU patients may be the result of overly aggressive intraoperative warming, infection or systemic inflammatory response related to surgery, transfusion reactions, or drug reactions. Less common but highly concerning reactions like malignant hyperthermia or neuroleptic malignant syndrome may also occur. Patients should be thoroughly evaluated as treatment depends largely on determining the underlying cause.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>