<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec286">IV. Microshock</h4>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><a href="ch044-sec02.xhtml#tt44-1">Table 44.1</a></strong> shows that a current threshold between 100&#x00A0; and 300&#x00A0;mA is required to induce ventricular fibrillation with a 60&#x00A0;Hz AC electrical shock. However, these results are calibrated for electrical current applied to the body. Electrical current applied directly to the heart can induce ventricular fibrillation with currents as low as 100&#x00A0;&#x03BC;A (0.1&#x00A0;mA), known as <strong><em>microshock</em></strong>. The patient can be placed at risk for microshock by any conductive medium that is in contact with the myocardium that also extends outside the body. For example, temporary pacemaker wires or a pulmonary artery (PA) catheter containing a conductive electrolyte solution can lead to microshocks. Since the LIM does not usually alarm until there is a possible shock current of at least 5&#x00A0;mA, the use of an isolated power system and LIM does not necessarily protect against the risk of microshock. The anesthesiologist must remember that a risk of microshock to the myocardium exists whenever devices are manipulated. These devices should not be handled while the anesthesiologist is simultaneously in physical contact with any other piece of electrical apparatus.<sup><a href="ch044-sec06.xhtml#bib6">6</a></sup></p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>