<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec290">II. Special Circumstances</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Some stressors are so vital they require intervention to continue practice. This has resulted in various legislative efforts, as described in the sections that follow.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen767">A. Americans With Disabilities Act</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The <strong><em>Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)</em></strong> is &#x201C;an Act to establish a clear and comprehensive prohibition of discrimination on the basis of disability&#x201D; that was signed into law by George H. W. Bush in 1990. This was followed in 2008 by the <strong><em>ADA Amendments Act (ADAAA)</em></strong>, which broadened the protections offered in the original bill. In order to be protected by the ADA, a person must demonstrate a<a id="page929"></a> disability to qualify for protection and then request reasonable accommodation. A major focus of the ADAAA was to clarify the meaning of disability and broaden its definition to include any impairment that &#x201C;substantially limits&#x201D; a &#x201C;major life activity.&#x201D; Although patients&#x2019; safety must take primary focus, there will occasionally be physicians who have physical or mental limitations, including visual and auditory impairments. Often, reasonable accommodations can be made to enable the anesthesiologist to perform in an acceptable manner. When this is possible, the patient is protected by the ADA. Controversy is introduced, however, when there is a question of whether the proposed accommodations are reasonable or when patient safety appears to be compromised. Further questions&#x2014;and controversies&#x2014;arise at the local level with regard to credentialing and privileges and at the indemnification level with liability insurance underwriting. These cases are rare and are generally dealt with on a case-by-case basis.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen768">B. Family and Medical Leave Act</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The <strong><em>Family and Medical Leave Act</em></strong> of 1993 was a federal attempt at protecting work-life balance by ensuring covered employees are job protected, albeit unpaid, and granted leave during times of family need, such as an illness in the family, military leave, personal illness or recovery, pregnancy, or adoption. Certain stipulations (eg, who is considered a covered employee, including employment of 12&#x00A0;months prior to leave) are made, but most employed physicians and trainees fall within this category. Many employers also provide paid leave for various periods of time and circumstances. Controversies persist regarding the relatively higher use by women for maternity leave, although the use of paternity leave does appear to be increasing.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>