<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec280">IV. Laser Surgery in Urology</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Numerous urologic problems have been treated effectively by laser therapy, such as condyloma acuminatum of the external genitalia, ureteral stricture or bladder neck contracture, interstitial cystitis, BPH, ureteral calculi, and superficial carcinoma of the penis, bladder, ureter, and renal pelvis. Minimal blood loss, decreased postoperative pain, and tissue denaturation are major advantages of laser surgery over traditional surgical approaches. Laser lithotripsy is used for ureteral stones that are low in the ureter and not amenable to ESWL. The stones absorb the laser beam, resulting in their disintegration. Ideally, general anesthesia with paralysis should be maintained to avoid patient movement. If regional anesthesia is chosen, a spinal level of T8 to T10 is required. Because lasers are an integral part of urologic surgery, understanding the indications and limitations of each type of laser is essential (<strong><a href="#tt43-4">Table 43.4</a></strong>).</p>
<p class="video"><video data-id="MQUm5wk7" controls="controls" class="jwp-video" crossorigin="anonymous" style="width:100%; height:auto; width:320px; height:240px;">Browser issues</video></p>
<p class="video1" id="vid43-2"><strong>VIDEO 43.2</strong></p>
<p class="video2"><strong>Laser Retrograde Ureteral Lithotripsy</strong></p>
<a id="page903"></a>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt43-4"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;43.4</span> Lasers Used for Urologic Surgery</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:30%;"></col>
<col style="width:30%;"></col>
<col style="width:40%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Type of Laser</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Characteristics</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Uses</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Carbon dioxide (CO<sub>2</sub>)</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Intense heat with vaporization, minimal tissue penetration</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Cutaneous lesions of the external genitalia</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Argon</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Selectively absorbed by hemoglobin and melanin</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Coagulation of bleeding sites in the bladder</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Pulsed dye</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Generates a pulsed output</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Destruction of ureteral calculi</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Nd-YAG laser (most versatile and widely used)</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Can be used in water or urine without loss of effectiveness, deep tissue penetration</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Lesions of the penis, urethra, bladder, ureters, and kidneys</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">KTP-532 laser (double the frequency of Nd-YAG laser)</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Better cutting effect, less deep tissue penetration</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Urethral strictures and bladder neck contractures</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">Nd-YAG, neodymium-doped yttrium aluminum garnet.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">Protective goggles with appropriate filtering lenses are available for each type of laser to minimize eye damage. The laser equipment should not be activated until all operating room personnel and the patient are wearing the appropriate goggles. All operating room personnel involved in carbon dioxide (CO<sub>2</sub>) laser procedures for condyloma acuminatum should wear protective masks that prevent inhalation of the plume (smoke) from the vaporization of tissue. This smoke may contain active human papillomavirus. In addition, the laser plume should be removed from the operating room with a smoke evacuation system.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>