<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec274">IV. Common Diagnoses in the ICU</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen747">A. Nosocomial Infections</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Nosocomial infections are a major source of morbidity and mortality in the critically ill, but many of them are preventable with relatively simple interventions. There are four types of infection that are relatively unique to inpatient and ICU care that should be considered when signs suggestive of infection arise. They are ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP), central line&#x2013;associated bloodstream infection (CLABSI), catheter-associated urinary tract infection (UTI), and <em>C. difficile</em> infection (CDI).</p>
<h6 class="h6">Ventilator-Associated Pneumonia</h6>
<p class="nonindent">The risk of developing VAP increases with the duration of mechanical ventilation. This underscores the importance of any intervention that can reduce the duration of mechanical ventilation such as SATs, SBTs, and sedation minimization. The exact definition and diagnostic criteria for VAP are controversial, but most agree that radiologic evidence of pneumonia, fever, leukocytosis, increasing sputum production, and quantitative culture results all may support the diagnosis. VAP is typically classified as early-onset (occurring within the first 48-72 hours of intubation or ventilation) or late-onset (occurring thereafter). Antibiotic-sensitive bacteria including <em>Haemophilus influenzae, Streptococcus pneumonia,</em> and methicillin-sensitive <em>Staphylococcus aureus</em> are often the causal organisms. In contrast, late-onset VAP is associated with more antibiotic-resistant organisms, including methicillin-resistant <em>Staphylococcus aureus</em> (MRSA), <em>Pseudomonas aeruginosa,</em> and <em>Acinetobacter.</em></p>
<p class="indent">A number of simple and low-cost interventions may reduce the incidence of VAP, including strict handwashing between patients, positioning the patient with at least 30&#x00B0; of head elevation, avoiding inappropriate use of gastric stress ulcer prophylaxis, using closed tracheal suction systems, and the use of chlorhexidine for daily oral decontamination. These practices should be rigorously applied in all ICUs.</p>
<p class="indent">Once VAP has developed, early detection and appropriate treatment are essential to reducing morbidity and mortality. As noted previously, the diagnostic criteria for VAP are controversial. However, an invasive diagnostic strategy is likely more accurate than traditional clinical criteria to diagnose VAP and is recommended whenever possible. Invasive strategies typically involve collection of bronchial-alveolar specimens using lavage or protected brushes and then quantitating bacterial growth in the laboratory.</p>
<p class="indent">Because delayed treatment of VAP is associated with increased mortality, treatment should not be delayed pending diagnostic evaluation. Treatment should be started after culture specimens are sent if the clinical suspicion of VAP is high. Antibiotics can then be narrowed in spectrum or discontinued depending on the results from quantitative cultures after 48&#x2013;72 hours. This approach of de-escalating therapy is designed to both ensure adequate initial antibiotic treatment and also to avoid development of antibiotic resistance. In general, antibiotic treatment for early-onset VAP can be relatively narrow in spectrum and limited to a single agent. Late-onset VAP requires broader spectrum antibiotics covering resistant gram-negative organisms and MRSA. <strong><a href="#tt42-4">Table 42.4</a></strong> lists common antibiotic selections for a variety of common infections. However, antibiotic selection should always consider local patterns of<a id="page886"></a> infection and hospital-specific antibiograms. Optimal therapy duration is not clear, but 8&#x00A0;days is typically sufficient unless multidrug-resistant organisms are present. In that case, 14&#x00A0;days or longer may be appropriate.</p>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt42-4"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;42.4</span> Suggested Empiric Antibiotic Regimens for Common Intensive Care Unit Infections</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:30%;"></col>
<col style="width:70%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="td3" colspan="2">
<p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Ventilator-Associated Pneumonia</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Early (&#x003C;72 h of intubation and hospital admission)</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Ceftriaxone PLUS azithromycin</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Consider adding vancomycin or linezolid if known history of MRSA</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Late (&#x003E;72 h of intubation or hospital admission)</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Vancomycin OR linezolid AND cefepime</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Consider adding ciprofloxacin if high incidence of MDR GNRs</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Bloodstream</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Vancomycin OR linezolid AND cefepime</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3" colspan="2">
<p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Urinary Tract</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Noncatheter-associated</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Ceftriaxone</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Catheter-associated</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Ceftazidime</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">ADD vancomycin if GPCs on Gram stain</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">CONSIDER meropenem instead of ceftazidime if concerned for MDR GNRs or ESBLs</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft"><em>Clostridium difficile</em> diarrhea</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Vancomycin (oral dosing)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">IF shock, megacolon, or ileus, then ADD intravenous metronidazole</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3" colspan="2">
<p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Meningitis</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Nonsurgical</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Dexamethasone AND ceftriaxone AND vancomycin AND ampicillin AND acyclovir</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Postsurgical</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Cefepime AND metronidazole AND vancomycin</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Intra-abdominal</strong></p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">&#x00A0;</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Community acquired</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Ceftriaxone AND metronidazole</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Hospital acquired</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Vancomycin AND either piperacillin-tazobactam OR meropenem</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Sepsis, site unknown</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Vancomycin AND meropenem</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Consider adding ciprofloxacin if concern for MDR GNRs or ESBLs</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">ESBL, extended spectrum beta-lactamase; GNR, gram-negative rods; GPC, gram-positive cocci; MDR, multidrug resistant; MRSA, methicillin-resistant <em>Staphylococcus aureus</em>.</p>
<p class="u_tfoot">Antibiotic regimens should be narrowed once culture results are available.</p>
</div>
<h6 class="h6">Central Line&#x2013;Associated Bloodstream Infections</h6>
<p class="nonindent">The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has a complex but strict definition for central line&#x2013;associated bloodstream infection (CLABSI). The specific criteria have changed over time and are important for epidemiologic and payment reasons but are less important clinically. Conceptually, CLABSIs are infections arising from the placement or use of a central venous catheter. They have received a great deal of attention due to their common occurrence, high financial costs associated with treating these infections, significant mortality, and, most important, preventable nature. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention&#x2019;s recommendations for practices that minimize such catheter-associated infectious risk are summarized in <strong><a href="#tt42-5">Table 42.5</a></strong>.</p>
<a id="page887"></a>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt42-5"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;42.5</span> Best Practices for Central Venous Catheter Placement</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<tr>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Subclavian and internal jugular veins are preferred over femoral veins</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Prep skin with chlorhexidine (if chlorhexidine allergy, 70% alcohol or tincture of iodine are acceptable alternatives)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Full barrier precautions (full body sterile drape)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Strict aseptic technique (handwashing, sterile gloves and gown, mask, and surgical cap)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Use ultrasound guidance to minimize the number of needle passes</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Choose a catheter with the minimum number of lumens possible for the clinical situation</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Use a chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge and sterile, transparent semipermeable dressing</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Inspect the catheter site daily for signs of infection</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Do not routinely replace catheters unless medically indicated<sup>a</sup></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Remove catheters as soon as possible</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot"><sup>a</sup> When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be maintained (eg, catheters placed emergently), the catheter should be replaced with aseptic technique as soon as possible.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">CLABSIs are commonly caused by a number of bacteria including <em>Staphylococcus epidermidis</em> and <em>S. aureus,</em> enteric gram-negative bacteria, <em>P. aeruginosa</em> and <em>Acinetobacter,</em> and occasionally <em>Enterococcal</em> species. Although coagulase-negative staphylococci are commonly isolated from blood cultures, they are in most cases contaminants. When catheter-related bacteremia is suspected, blood cultures should be tested from the catheter and peripheral sites, and consideration should be given to catheter removal. If infection is confirmed, the catheter should be removed promptly and replaced if necessary. As with other infections, prompt initiation of antibiotics may be lifesaving. High clinical suspicion of infection should trigger the initiation of broad-spectrum antibiotic coverage. <strong><a href="#tt42-4">Table 42.4</a></strong> lists the common antibiotic regimens for CLABSI treatment.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Catheter-Associated UTI</h6>
<p class="nonindent">UTIs are the second most common source of ICU infection. Because the incidence of catheter-associated UTI (CAUTI) increases with the duration of bladder catheterization, the necessity of an indwelling catheter should be reviewed daily and it should be removed as soon as possible. Other strategies to minimize the risk of CAUTIs include adherence to aseptic technique during placement, using bladder scans to minimize unnecessary catheter insertion, and maintaining the drainage bag below the level of the bladder. The responsible organisms are similar to those causing other nosocomial infections, including <em>Staphylococcal</em> species, <em>Enterococcus</em> species<em>,</em> enteric gram-negative bacteria, and non&#x2013;lactose-fermenting gram-negative bacteria such as <em>Pseudomonas.</em> Once the diagnosis of a CAUTI has been made, it is reasonable to remove and replace the catheter (if still indicated) in an effort to reduce the microbiologic burden while also starting antibiotics. Recommended antibiotic treatment for UTIs is presented in Table 41.4.</p>
<a id="page888"></a>
<h6 class="h6"><strong><em>Clostridium difficile</em></strong> Diarrhea</h6>
<p class="nonindent">CDI has surpassed MRSA as the most common hospital-acquired infection. Pharmacologic risk factors for CDI include the use of antibiotics, antineoplastic agents, corticosteroids, and proton-pump inhibitors. Although clindamycin, third-generation cephalosporins, and ampicillin are the most commonly implicated antibiotics, nearly all antibiotics, including metronidazole and vancomycin, may increase the risk. Other significant risk factors include prior CDI, chronic dialysis, gastrointestinal surgery, recent hospitalization, and postpyloric feeding. Diarrhea is the most common symptom, but it is not always present. Fever, abdominal pain, constipation, and leukocytosis (commonly with white blood cell counts &#x003E;20,000/mm<sup><a href="ch042-sec06.xhtml#bib3">3</a></sup>) should prompt consideration of the diagnosis, which can be further confirmed by a number of laboratory methods. It should be noted, however, that all currently available laboratory tests are imperfect, and considerable debate exists as to which is the best. Once the diagnosis is confirmed, the treatments outlined in Table 41.4 can be initiated.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">With adoption in 2012 of the Berlin definition of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), the previous distinction between acute lung injury and ARDS has been replaced by the classification of ARDS into mild, moderate, or severe based on the degree of hypoxemia.</p>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>