<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec293">V. Promoting Wellness</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Although many suggest that personal well-being is an individual responsibility, recent data highlighting rates of burnout, SUD, and SUD-related death underscore the obligation of the profession in promoting well-being for its members. Moreover, as wellness principles become integrated into training and practice, there will likely be an inevitable extension into the concept of personal well-being as a &#x201C;duty owed&#x201D; to patients.</p>
<p class="indent">The components of wellness are varied, but certain approaches to decrease stress or increase resilience have been well validated and studied. Although fitness, nutrition, proper rest, fiscal responsibility, and work-life balance are all important components of wellness, none have been as solidly linked to improved physician well-being as <strong><em>mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR)</em></strong>. Mindfulness carries many different definitions, all of which express<a id="page932"></a> the concept of an intentional, enhanced, and nonjudgmental awareness of one&#x2019;s environment and an inclination for living in the present moment. Rooted in Buddhist philosophy, the incorporation of mindfulness in contemporary medical practice has been led by the work of Jon Kabat-Zinn. Decreases in chronic pain and anxiety, and improved wound healing have been reported, with some recent studies demonstrating changes in brain architecture and gene expression as well as improvements in perceived levels of stress. Many medical schools are also starting to integrate MBSR as well as the concept of mindful practice into their curricula. These curricula, while varied, seek to prevent compassion fatigue and burnout, increase physician engagement and self-awareness, and decrease overall stress levels.<sup><a href="ch045-sec06.xhtml#bib12">12</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Beyond the personal responsibility, however, is the impact of more systemic and external factors on physician well-being. In fact, the COVID-19 pandemic offers an incomparable opportunity to examine the delicate wellness balance between healthcare organizations and the individuals who comprise them; ultimately, the crucible of wellness care for the organization and its patients will be reflected in how the organization took care of its workers. Even prior to COVID-19, many national organizations, such as the National Academies of Medicine, were heavily engaged in addressing well-being at a higher organizational and policy level, representing the future direction of wellness interventions.<sup><a href="ch045-sec06.xhtml#bib13">13</a></sup></p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>