<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec262">XII. Electrolyte Abnormalities</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Electrolyte derangements are common in the postoperative period, and early manifestations of these abnormalities may become apparent in the PACU. Changes in serum sodium, potassium, and calcium are among the most common electrolyte abnormalities encountered.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen713">A. Hyponatremia</h5>
<p class="nonindent">In the postoperative period, low serum sodium concentration is most commonly the result of syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH) or significant fluid resuscitation with hypotonic solutions such as lactated ringers (LR) (sodium concentration of 130 mEq/L). Additionally, pseudohyponatremia due to very high blood glucose or triglyceride levels should be ruled out. Mild hyponatremia will typically resolve with time or potentially through diuresis in the hypervolemic patient. Although rare, moderate to severe hyponatremia can result from transurethral resection of prostate (TURP) syndrome, where significant amounts of irrigation fluid are absorbed when under pressure in a closed body cavity. Severe hyponatremia (&#x003C;120 mEq/L) can lead to life-threatening symptoms including impaired consciousness and seizures and should be corrected with hypertonic saline in a controlled manner to avoid central pontine myelinolysis.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen714">B. Hypernatremia</h5>
<p class="nonindent">While less common than hyponatremia in the postoperative period, hypernatremia may result from aggressive diuresis with diuretics like furosemide<a id="page846"></a> or osmotic agents like mannitol. Additionally, patients with subarachnoid hemorrhage or traumatic brain injury or those undergoing surgery involving the pituitary gland may be at risk for diabetes insipidus postoperatively. The resultant hypernatremia can be treated with free water repletion and administration of desmopressin.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen715">C. Hyperkalemia</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Postoperative hyperkalemia may be the result of perioperative tissue necrosis, reperfusion of ischemic tissue, massive transfusion, hemolytic reactions, significant acidosis, inappropriate succinylcholine administration, or malignant hyperthermia. Patients with significant renal disease will be at increased risk of hyperkalemia due to decreased excretion. Initial workup should include an ECG to look for concerning abnormalities like peaked T waves or QRS widening. Management may include shifting potassium intracellularly with agents like insulin, beta-agonists, or bicarbonate or eliminating potassium in the urine or from the GI tract with agents such as loop diuretics or potassium-binding agents. Severe hyperkalemia may necessitate hemodialysis. In the setting of ECG changes, calcium should be considered to stabilize cardiac myocyte membranes, as these patients are at risk for malignant ventricular arrhythmias.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen716">D. Hypokalemia</h5>
<p class="nonindent">A drop in potassium levels may be the result of medication administration (ie, insulin, beta agonists, furosemide), aggressive fluid resuscitation without potassium repletion, or acute alkalosis that shifts potassium intracellularly. Significant hypokalemia may lead to QTc prolongation and predispose patients to malignant arrhythmias including torsades de pointes and atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular response. IV potassium should be administered either peripherally or through a central venous catheter until levels are normalized.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen717">E. Hypocalcemia</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Calcium levels may drop intraoperatively or postoperatively due to calcium chelation with administration of albumin or citrate in blood products. Thyroid or parathyroid surgery may also result in postoperative hypoparathyroidism and subsequent hypocalcemia, although this typically develops after PACU discharge. Hyperventilation from pain or anxiety may result in an acute drop in ionized calcium. Symptoms of acute hypocalcemia typically include perioral numbness, paresthesias, and muscle cramps, and these can progress to severe muscle spasms, laryngospasm, or even seizures. Cardiovascular manifestations may include hypotension due to impaired cardiac contractility and QTc prolongation. Treatment involves correcting ionized calcium levels with IV administration of calcium chloride or alternatively calcium gluconate.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>