<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<section epub:type="chapter">
<div id="main_container">
<header>
<a id="page877"></a>
<h1 id="c42" class="chapter_name"><span class="chapter_name">42</span></h1>
<h2 class="chapter_title">Critical Care Medicine</h2>
<p class="author">Matthew R. Hallman and Vanessa M. Cervantes</p>
</header>
<p class="nonindent">The practice of critical care medicine (CCM) and development of intensive care units (ICUs) date to at least the 1940s and perhaps earlier. Advances in surgical interventions along with increased incidences of respiratory failure due to polio epidemics led to an increased demand for physicians specializing in the care of critically ill patients, especially patients with respiratory failure. To meet this demand, the first CCM training program was established by Peter Safar, an anesthesiologist at the University of Pittsburgh, in the 1960s, but it was not until 1986 that the first CCM board certification examination was administered by the American Board of Anesthesiology. As of 2019, approximately 2600 anesthesiologists had completed the CCM certification process. However, &#x003C;10% of practicing intensivists are anesthesiologists, and the majority of intensivists in the United States continue to be pulmonary physicians. Physicians of other specialties including surgery, pediatrics, emergency medicine, and neurology also pursue training in critical care medicine. Fortunately for those interested in this specialty, the future need for intensivists is expected to be much greater than the supply.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Critical care medicine and the development of intensive care units were initiated in response to the increased incidence of respiratory failure observed during the US polio epidemic of the 1940s, with the first critical care medicine training program established by a University of Pittsburgh anesthesiologist, Dr Peter Safar.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">The scope of CCM is vast, covering nearly every aspect of illness and injury and drawing upon knowledge from nearly every medical and surgical specialty. It is also a specialty that continues to undergo tremendous change. New technologies, equipment, and medications along with increased understanding of diseases and pathophysiology allow for the treatment of increasingly ill patients. More recently, as the economics of healthcare delivery have received increased attention, the focus on delivering evidence-based, cost-effective care has also increased. Because the ICU is one of the most resource-intensive areas of modern hospitals, care of patients in the ICU has been identified as an obvious target for increased efficiency.</p>
<p class="indent">Although the entire spectrum of critical care is beyond the scope of this chapter, widely applicable aspects of contemporary critical care are reviewed here. The first part of the chapter addresses processes of care that are applicable to most ICU settings, including both medical and surgical ICUs. The second part of the chapter provides an overview of the management for some commonly encountered diagnoses. The entire chapter focuses on evidence-based practices that may improve both patient outcomes and healthcare system performance in the perioperative setting.</p>
</div>
</section>
</body>
</html>