<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec258">VIII. Postoperative Hypertension</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Hypertension is commonly encountered in the immediate postoperative period, and while no specific blood pressure cutoff has been established, postoperative hypertension is independently associated with complications after noncardiac surgery. Among the most common causes of hypertension in PACU are inadequately managed pain, nausea, anxiety, bladder distension, hypercarbia, emergence delirium, and perioperative holding of antihypertensive medications. Postoperative hypertension puts patients at risk for myocardial ischemia, stroke, bleeding, and elevated intracranial pressure (ICP) and intraocular pressure. Specific surgical populations are at particularly increased risk of complications and may require more aggressive blood pressure management. These include intracranial procedures, ocular surgery, carotid surgery, and other surgeries involving arterial anastomoses. Typical goals for blood pressure management in the PACU involve<a id="page843"></a> maintaining pressure within 20% of baseline. Initial management should involve verification of blood pressure readings and confirmation of appropriate blood pressure cuff size or arterial line transducer placement. After assessment, treatment should address the cause of hypertension. Once all secondary causes of hypertension have been ruled out or treated, titrated doses of labetalol or hydralazine may be appropriate to treat presumed primary hypertension. Patients requiring particularly tight blood pressure control may benefit from continuous infusions of nitroglycerine, nicardipine, or esmolol, and these patients will likely require ICU or step-down admission after PACU discharge. Day surgery patients that require management of postoperative hypertension may benefit from a dose of any home antihypertensive they may have held preoperatively.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>