<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec271">I. Processes of Care</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen738">A. Staffing</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Advances in medical and surgical therapeutics have increased the complexity of care for an aging and increasingly ill population. It has become clear that providing the best care for such a population requires a knowledge <a id="page878"></a>base and skill set that are highly specialized and that involving intensivists in the care of critically ill patients is desirable. Compared with low-intensity staffing models, <strong><em>high-intensity staffing</em></strong> models (ie, an intensivist-led team or mandatory consultation of an intensivist) are associated with lower hospital and ICU mortality as well as shorter hospital and ICU lengths of stay.<sup><a href="ch042-sec06.xhtml#bib1">1</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Patient outcomes appear to be further improved by the addition of <strong><em>multidisciplinary</em></strong> providers to intensivist-led teams. Examples include pharmacist participation in daily rounds, as well as the inclusion of nurses, dieticians, and respiratory therapists. These practices significantly reduce costs and medication-related adverse events and are also associated with decreased patient mortality.<sup><a href="ch042-sec06.xhtml#bib2">2</a></sup></p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen739">B. Checklists</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Despite the improvement in communication and information transfer that occurs with multidisciplinary teams, high stress and a massive volume of information in the ICU environment can lead to errors. Checklists have been widely implemented on ICU rounds as cognitive aids that serve as daily reminders to evaluate a limited number of interventions, preventative measures, bundles, and processes of care that can improve outcomes. Their implementation is associated with decreased mortality and ICU length of stay, and their cost is negligible.<sup><a href="ch042-sec06.xhtml#bib3">3</a></sup> Considering the potential benefits and the minimal economic investment required for checklist implementation, their use is strongly recommended. In fact, many of the care processes discussed in this chapter commonly appear on checklists and should be considered for every patient, every day. Suggested content for consideration and inclusion in a daily ICU checklist is listed in <strong><a href="#tt42-1">Table 42.1</a></strong>. Content might be added or removed based on local ICU considerations.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen740">C. Resource Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">In 2014, the Critical Care Societies Collaborative released a list of &#x201C;Five Things Physicians and Patients Should Question&#x201D; in critical care as part of the Choosing Wisely campaign. The campaign is designed to reduce unnecessary interventions that lack cost-effectiveness and has been supported by many medical specialties. At the top of the list is a recommendation to not order diagnostic studies (chest x-rays, blood gases, blood chemistries and counts, and electrocardiograms) at regular intervals (eg, daily) unless there is a clear indication. Compared with the practice of ordering tests only to answer clinical questions or when doing so will directly affect management, the routine ordering of tests increases costs, does not benefit patients, and may in fact harm them. This and other efforts to minimize unnecessary interventions recognize both the financial impact medical practice decisions have <a id="page879"></a>on individual patients and the healthcare system overall. These efforts also emphasize the physician&#x2019;s role in providing not just effective care, but efficient care.</p>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt42-1"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;42.1</span> Suggested Daily Intensive Care Unit Checklist</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:50%;"></col>
<col style="width:50%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="td3">
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Spontaneous awakening trial</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Spontaneous breathing trial</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Nutrition/diet ordered</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Glucose control adequate</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Deep vein thrombosis prophylaxis initiated</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Unnecessary laboratory tests and imaging discontinued</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Antibiotics discontinued</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Foley catheter removed</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Central venous catheter and arterial line removed</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Once commonplace in intensive care units, the routine, scheduled performance of diagnostic tests (eg, daily chest x-ray) is no longer indicated due to increased costs, questionable clinical benefit, and possible patient harm.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen741">D. Analgesia and Sedation</h5>
<h6 class="h6">Pain</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Pain is defined as &#x201C;an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associated with actual or potential tissue damage, or described in terms of such damage<sup><a href="ch042-sec06.xhtml#bib4">4</a></sup>&#x201D; and is experienced differently by each individual. Agitation and delirium are additional conditions often closely linked with pain in the critically ill population. Both the patient&#x2019;s underlying medical conditions and the assessments and interventions that occur as part of ICU care can contribute to the development of pain, agitation, and delirium (PAD). <strong><em>An effective PAD management program should be tailored to each individual patient and involve steps to prevent, detect, quantify, treat, and reassess PAD.</em></strong></p>
<p class="indent">Opioids are the primary modality of treating moderate to severe pain in critically ill adults. However, they have undesirable side effects including nausea, constipation, respiratory depression, immunosuppression, and alteration of mental status. When titrated to similar end points, there is not one opioid medication that has been shown to be superior to others. In order to reduce opioid-related side effects, nonopioid analgesics such as acetaminophen, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, local anesthetics, ketamine, alpha-2 agonists, and &#x03B3;-aminobutyric acid analogues may be used in conjunction with opioids. In the case of mild pain, acetaminophen or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may replace opioids altogether. Regional anesthesia techniques may also be helpful in managing a variety of types of pain including extremity injuries, incisional pain on the torso, and rib fractures. Neuropathic pain, commonly related to diabetes and vascular disease, can be just as debilitating as nonneuropathic pain and therefore deserves equal attention. Although all these medications can play a role in the management of neuropathic pain, the &#x03B3;-aminobutyric acid analogues, such as gabapentin, pregabalin, and carbamazepine, are recommended as first-line agents.<sup><a href="ch042-sec06.xhtml#bib5">5</a></sup> Nonpharmacologic interventions that may also help reduce pain include massage therapy, music, ice packs, and relaxation techniques.</p>
<p class="indent">In all instances, before and after assessments of pain severity should be made to guide further analgesic administration. A number of validated assessment instruments exist including the Numeric Rating Scale, Faces Pain Thermometer, Behavioral Pain Scale, and the Critical Care Pain Observation Tool. Family members may be involved in the pain assessment process in certain situations when a patient is unable to self-report. It is important to note that vital signs alone should not be used to assess pain but may be a clue (ie, pain-induced sympathetic nervous system activation) to further investigate whether pain is present.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Agitation and Delirium</h6>
<p class="nonindent">A variety of factors may contribute to the development of agitation and delirium including pain, hypotension, hypoxemia, hypoglycemia, alcohol and other drug intoxication or withdrawal, sleep cycle alteration, light, noise, and mechanical ventilation. These contributing factors should be sought out and aggressively corrected. Similar to pain treatment, treating agitation and <a id="page880"></a>delirium effectively requires patient assessment followed by an intervention, with a subsequent reassessment to determine the effectiveness of the intervention. There are multiple validated agitation and delirium assessment tools, including the Richmond Agitation Sedation Score and the Sedation-Agitation Scale for agitation and the Confusion Assessment Method for the ICU and ICU Delirium Screening Checklist for delirium. All patients should have daily screening with one of these tools. When agitation and delirium are detected, it is especially important to differentiate pain from other etiologies as appropriate treatment of pain may eliminate the need for additional sedatives. Efforts should also be made in all patients to minimize sleep interruption and to maintain a normal sleep-wake cycle. Opening the window shades, turning on lights, and engaging the patient with cognitive stimulation and mobilization during the day, while turning off lights, minimizing noise, and minimizing procedures at night all help to achieve this goal. It is also important to minimize sensory impairments by providing patients with their glasses or hearing aids whenever possible.</p>
<p class="indent">When pharmacologic intervention is necessary, the goal is to use the smallest amount of sedative possible. Although deeper states of sedation may make patient care easier, minimal sedation is associated with improved outcomes including reduced duration of mechanical ventilation and shorter ICU stays. Pharmacologic treatment of agitation commonly involves benzodiazepines, propofol, antipsychotics, and dexmedetomidine. Although all these agents are potentially useful for agitation treatment, benzodiazepines are associated with increased delirium and should be minimized unless alcohol withdrawal is suspected. Regardless of the agent used, unless there is a specific contraindication to stopping sedation, all patients should have a daily <strong><em>spontaneous awakening trial (SAT)</em></strong>.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">For mechanically ventilated patients in the intensive care unit who are recovering respiratory function, a spontaneous breathing trial (reduced ventilator support while the trachea is still intubated) is often coupled with a spontaneous awakening trial (reduced administration of sedative medications) to determine the likelihood of successful tracheal extubation.</p>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>