<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec251">I. Introduction and Postoperative Workflow</h4>
<p class="nonindent">It is an American Society of Anesthesiology (ASA) standard that all patients should receive appropriate postanesthesia management following general, regional, or monitored anesthesia care.<sup><a href="ch040-sec16.xhtml#bib1">1</a></sup> This management will most commonly be provided in the postoperative care unit (PACU) except on the occasion that either the anesthesiologist responsible for the patient&#x2019;s intraoperative care documents that the patient meets criteria to bypass the PACU and go straight to a regular inpatient floor, or the patient meets criteria for admission to the intensive care unit (ICU). Criteria for direct ICU admission from the operating room include, but are not limited to:</p>
<ul class="u_bullb"><li><span>Ongoing needs for mechanical ventilation.</span></li>
<li><span>High risk of airway obstruction or compromise.</span></li>
<li><span>Dependence on vasoactive medications to support blood pressure and cardiac output.</span></li>
<li><span>Requirement for invasive or frequent neurologic monitoring.</span></li>
<li><span>Need for acute renal replacement therapy.</span></li>
<li><span>Risk for significant ongoing bleeding or coagulopathy requiring resuscitation.</span></li></ul>
<p class="indent">The majority of postoperative patients will end up being managed in the PACU postoperatively. The goal of the PACU is to allow a patient time to recover physiologically from anesthesia and surgery to the point where they are safe to transition either to a regular inpatient floor or back to their home. The PACU provides a closely monitored setting in which acute postoperative conditions can be identified and managed, as described in the following sections. ASA standards help to guide quality care of the PACU patient (<strong><a href="#tt40-1">Table 40.1</a></strong>).</p>
<p class="indent">Before leaving the PACU for transfer either to an inpatient unit or home, all patients must be evaluated to assess that they have recovered from the acute effects of anesthesia. Criteria for discharge may vary between institutions and may have modifications dependent on the type of anesthesia administered and the destination of discharge. Generally, criteria will include assessment that the patient has returned to baseline neurologic status with pain at an acceptable level, the ability to maintain a patent airway and stable oxygenation, hemodynamic measurements within acceptable parameters, and no evidence of significant ongoing hypovolemia or bleeding. Additional or modified criteria may<a id="page835"></a> be applied if the patient has undergone neuraxial anesthesia or a peripheral nerve block. If the patient is going to be discharged home, they will need to receive a written summary with instructions, future relevant appointments and prescriptions. Extended recovery units, where patients may be kept overnight for observation but are discharged within 24 hours have also become increasingly common and are an option for PACU discharge at many facilities.</p>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt40-1"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;40.1</span> ASA Standards for Postoperative Care</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:50%;"></col>
<col style="width:50%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="theadleft">&#x00A0;</td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>ASA Standard</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Transport</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Member of the anesthesia team with detailed knowledge of patient&#x2019;s condition present</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Appropriate monitoring and support provided</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Hand-off</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Verbal report from anesthesia provider to RN</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Report should include preoperative comorbidities, allergies, intraoperative course, potential postoperative issues</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Initial evaluation by PACU RN</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Anesthesia provider remains until PACU RN accepts responsibility</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Reevaluation/Monitoring</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Continual evaluation and documentation of patient&#x2019;s condition</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Should include oxygenation, ventilation, hemodynamics, fluid balance, level of consciousness and temperature</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Responsible physician present to manage complications and provide advanced life support if needed</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Discharge from PACU</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Patients may be discharged from the PACU once departmentally approved discharge criteria are met</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Discharge criteria may vary depending on the type of anesthesia performed and whether the patient is being discharged to an inpatient setting versus back to the community</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">PACU, postoperative care unit.</p>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>