<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec294">VI. Conclusions</h4>
<p class="nonindent">In order to provide sustained care, a person must have a degree of well-being. Given the data accumulating on anesthesiologist burnout, depression, suicidality, SUD, and SUD-related death, there should be substantial concern that common, as well as unique, problems exist within the specialty of anesthesiology. Fortunately, research and a body of literature are emerging on recognition and interventions focused on decreasing burnout and improving physician well-being.</p>
<a id="page933"></a><a id="page934"></a><a id="page935"></a><a id="page936"></a>
<p class="BIBLIOGRAPHYpTitle">References</p>
<ol class="ref"><li id="bib1">Frank J, Snell L, Sherbino J. <em>CanMEDS 2015 Physician Competency Framework</em>. Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada; 2015.</li>
<li id="bib2">Maslach C, Jackson S. <em>Maslach Burnout Inventory</em>. 2nd ed. Consulting Psychologists Press; 1986.</li>
<li id="bib3">Jackson S. The role of stress in anaesthetists&#x2019; health and well-being. <em>Acta Anaesthesiol Scand</em>. 1999;43(6).</li>
<li id="bib4">Garcia L, Shanafelt T, West C, et al. Burnout, depression, career satisfaction, and Work-life integration by physician race/ethnicity. <em>JAMA Netw Open</em>. 2020;3(8):e2012762. doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.12762</li>
<li id="bib5">Warner D, Berge K, Sun H, Harman A, Hanson A, Schroeder D. Substance use disorder among anesthesiology residents 1975-2009. <em>J Am Med Assoc</em>. 2013;310(21):2289-2296.</li>
<li id="bib6">Warner D, Berge K, Sun H, Harman A, Wang T. Substance use disorder in physicians after completion of training in anesthesiology in the United States from 1977 to 2013. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2020;133(2):342-3497.</li>
<li id="bib7">Dellinger E, Pellegrini C, Gallagher T. The aging physician and the medical profession: a review. <em>JAMA Surg</em>. 2017;152(10):967-971.</li>
<li id="bib8">Tessler M, Shrier I, Steele R. Association between anesthesiologist age and litigation. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2012;115(3):574-579.</li>
<li id="bib9">Gazoni F, Durieux M, Wells L. Life after death: the aftermath of perioperative catastrophes. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2008;107:591-600.</li>
<li id="bib10">Fleisher L, Sweenet R, Clapp J, Barsade S. Managing anxiety in anesthesiology and intensive care providers during the COVID-19 pandemic; an analysis of the psychosocial response of a front-line department. <em>NEJM Catalyst</em> 2020. doi:10.1056/CAT.20.0270</li>
<li id="bib11">Jena A, Seabury S, Lakdawalla D, Chandra A. Malpractice risk according to physician specialty. <em>N Engl J Med</em>. 2011;365(7):629-636.</li>
<li id="bib12">Dobkin P, Hutchinson T. Teaching mindfulness in medical school: where are we now and where are we going? <em>Med Educ</em>. 2013;47(8):768-779.</li>
<li id="bib13">National Academies of Sciences Engineering and Medicine. <em>Taking Action against Clinician Burnout: A Systems Approach to Professional Well-Being</em>. National Academy of Medicine; 2019.</li></ol>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>