<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec292">IV. Providing Support</h4>
<p class="nonindent">At some point in the anesthesiologist&#x2019;s career, an extraordinarily stressful event will be encountered that will require additional assistance with either processing or navigating the situation. It is unfortunate that not everyone faced with these situations seeks or accepts such assistance. Two specific situations arise during the careers of many anesthesiologists: adverse clinical events and malpractice litigation (see <a href="ch041.xhtml">Chapter 41</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen771">A. After an Adverse Event</h5>
<p class="nonindent">&#x201C;War stories&#x201D; of perioperative catastrophes are occasionally shared in the anesthesia lounge, but until recently, the prevalence and impact of these events was not fully described. In 2012, a survey study was sent to 1200 members of the ASA. Gazoni et al<sup><a href="ch045-sec06.xhtml#bib9">9</a></sup> reported on this survey and found that, with a 56% <a id="page931"></a>response rate, 84% of respondents had experienced at least one unexpected perioperative catastrophe. Of these, 19% reported never having fully recovered from the event, nearly all (88%) required some time to recover emotionally, and 67% felt the care they were delivering over the subsequent 4 hours was compromised. Despite this, only 7% were given any time off to recover.</p>
<p class="indent">The COVID-19 crisis offered a uniquely stressful milieu for anesthesiologists and critical care specialists to expand individuals&#x2019; responses to adverse events and to consider front-line healthcare workers as a class with similar values, tasks, and responsibilities. Fleisher et al identified multifactorial stressors within their department as well as its individuals in the context of larger social systems such as the family, the influence of the media, and availability of personal protective equipment (PPE). They also found a significant interaction between trait anxiety of individuals and a culture of anxiety: clinicians who scored lower in trait anxiety showed a greater increase in anxiety related to the culture of anxiety of those around them.<sup><a href="ch045-sec06.xhtml#bib10">10</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Already moving in this direction prior to the COVID crisis, many hospitals, universities, malpractice providers, and other organizations began to offer structured support following adverse events. These come in the form of peer support, formal counseling, debriefing, and even mandatory time away from clinical practice. It is wise to become familiar with the support resources available in one&#x2019;s practice environment in the event that such assistance is someday required following an adverse clinical event.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen772">B. During or After a Malpractice Claim</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Despite the historical role of anesthesiologists in improving patient safety, anesthesiologists can still find themselves named in a malpractice claim. A recent study of malpractice claims for a national carrier demonstrated anesthesiologists to have an annual risk of malpractice claims and payment similar to that of other medical specialists.<sup><a href="ch045-sec06.xhtml#bib11">11</a></sup> This can be one of the most stressful events in a physician&#x2019;s life, with distress arising from the uncertainty of outcomes, the prolonged nature of many lawsuits, and the sense of isolation that can occur when advised to not discuss the case with others. Although physicians&#x2019; ego, financial security, and career are seemingly at risk during the litigation process, they also must repeatedly relive a potentially traumatizing adverse clinical event, adding to the psychological impact of the experience. Many malpractice carriers offer support and assistance during the difficult process of a medical malpractice lawsuit.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Although fitness, nutrition, proper rest, fiscal responsibility, and work-life balance are all important components of wellness, mindfulness-based stress reduction&#x2014;an intentional, enhanced, and nonjudgmental awareness of one&#x2019;s environment and an inclination for living in the present moment&#x2014;is most strongly linked to physician well-being.</p>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>