<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec259">IX. Postoperative Hypotension</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Postoperative hypotension is common and often transient due to residual vasoplegia and decreased sympathetic tone from anesthetic agents. However, the concern with prolonged or profound hypotension is reduced tissue perfusion leading to supply-demand imbalance and end-organ ischemic injury like acute kidney injury and myocardial ischemia.</p>
<p class="indent">Causes of hypotension can be divided into preload, cardiac/obstructive and afterload. Preload etiologies include intravascular hypovolemia from dehydration, third-spacing, or ongoing surgical bleeding. Cardiac or obstructive causes of hypotension include left heart failure, right heart failure, tension pneumothorax, cardiac tamponade, and large pulmonary embolus. The most common postoperative cause of hypotension, as mentioned, is vasoplegia from residual anesthetic leading to significant afterload reduction. This can also lead to peripheral pooling of blood and a resultant decrease in preload.</p>
<p class="indent">Workup should include a focused physical examination and evaluation of symptoms and signs such as light-headedness, chest pain, shortness of breath, oliguria, tachycardia or bradycardia, cardiac arrhythmias, and hypoxia. Depending on the severity and suspected etiology, a 12 lead electrocardiogram (ECG), cardiac enzymes, electrolytes, ABG, complete blood count, and CXR can be obtained. The patient&#x2019;s response to a fluid challenge may help to differentiate the etiology of their hypotension.</p>
<p class="indent">Increasingly, point of care ultrasound is being used to provide additional information to the clinical examination to aid rapid diagnosis and management of postoperative hypotension.<sup><a href="ch040-sec16.xhtml#bib9">9</a>,<a href="ch040-sec16.xhtml#bib10">10</a></sup> A bedside focused cardiac ultrasound examination can rapidly identify if the left ventricle has depressed function or is hyperdynamic, if there are regional wall motion abnormalities, right heart dysfunction, or if there is a pericardial effusion that may be causing tamponade physiology. A small, collapsed inferior vena cava (IVC) correlates with low right atrial pressure and may indicate hypovolemia. Lung ultrasound can be used to diagnose a pneumothorax that may be causing tamponade physiology or pulmonary edema and pleural effusions that may suggest decompensated heart failure. Abdominal ultrasound may identify intraperitoneal free fluid and could suggest ongoing postoperative surgical bleeding in the context of abdominal surgery (<strong><a href="ch040-sec10.xhtml#ff40-3">Figure 40.3</a></strong>).</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">A bedside focused cardiac ultrasound is a useful tool in differentiating various causes of postoperative hypotension.</p>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>