<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<section epub:type="chapter">
<div id="main_container">
<header>
<a id="page908"></a>
<h1 id="c44" class="chapter_name"><span class="chapter_name">44</span></h1>
<h2 class="chapter_title">Electrical Safety and Fire</h2>
<p class="author">Theodora Valovska and Christopher W. Connor</p>
</header>
<p class="nonindent">The physics and engineering principles involved in electrical supply and electrical safety are very well established, though they may not be intuitively obvious. Firstly, this is a matter of unfamiliarity&#x2014;as clinicians and as citizens of developed countries, we usually presume that the electrical supply will be present and equipment will be working safely on a daily basis, without giving much thought to its source or configuration. In the setting of prolonged power failures, or if we had to make do with dilapidated or broken equipment, we might find ourselves at a loss.</p>
<p class="indent">Secondly, the terminology of electrical engineering is commonly misused by laypeople leading to imprecise and incorrect usage. For instance, the simple word &#x201C;ground,&#x201D; &#x201C;grounded,&#x201D; or &#x201C;grounding&#x201D; might take on multiple different meanings in an operating room (OR) setting:</p>
<ol class="u_num1">
<li><span>The physical surface of the Earth</span></li>
<li><span>The voltage ascribed, by convention, to the Earth: 0&#x00A0;V</span></li>
<li><span>Describing an electrical plug or socket that has three pins</span></li>
<li><span>The green electrical wire, the ground lead, found within electrical power cables</span></li>
<li><span>The adhesive pad that forms the dispersive return electrode for an electrosurgical unit</span></li>
<li><span>The act of connecting a patient to some form of electrical apparatus such as the electrosurgical unit. (&#x201C;Is the patient grounded?&#x201D;)</span></li>
<li><span>A state of failure of the OR&#x2019;s isolated electrical power system, in which the system &#x201C;becomes grounded&#x201D;</span></li></ol>
<p class="indent">In the setting of, for example, a shoulder arthroscopy in an ambulatory surgery center, in which arthroscopic video cameras, instruments, and electrosurgery are being used, this wordage can become important. Suppose a large puddle of joint irrigation solution has accumulated on the floor, spreading among cables, between the feet of the surgeon and anesthesiologist. Who is safe in this situation? Or, if while on bypass in a major cardiac case in the middle of the night, the electrical safety monitors in the room begin to alarm loudly&#x2014;what is the next step to ensure patient safety? In order to respond confidently and appropriately, it is necessary to understand the principles of intraoperative electrical safety and fire management.</p>
<a id="page909"></a>
</div>
</section>
</body>
</html>