<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/jquery.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
<!--<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-1.10.2.min.js'></script>-->
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-migrate-1.2.1.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery.qtip.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/etext.js'></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec270">IV. Professional Liability</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen735">A. Professionalism and Licensure</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Anesthesiologists, legally, are considered professionals. As such, they must have met specific standards of education and training. These standards of practice and ethics are codified in codes of conduct specific to medicine and the specialty. All physicians owe a fiduciary duty to their patients.</p>
<p class="indent">Epstein and Hundert<sup><a href="#bib16">16</a></sup> define &#x201C;professionalism&#x201D; as a &#x201C;habitual and judicious use of communication, knowledge, technical skills, clinical reasoning, emotions, values, and reflection in daily practice for the benefit of the individual and community being served.&#x201D; An international panel of medical societies defined three fundamental principles of professionalism: (1) the primacy of patient welfare, which addresses altruism, trust, and patient interest; (2) patient autonomy addressing the importance of honesty with patients and the need to empower patients in medical decision-making; and (3) social justice addressing providers&#x2019; societal contract and distributive justice in consideration of the finite nature of healthcare resources (<strong><a href="#tt41-4">Table 41.4</a></strong>). Specific to anesthesiology, Tetzlaff has defined the essentials of professionalism to include the following: (1) accountability; (2) humanism; (3) personal well-being; and (4) <a id="page869"></a>ethics.<sup><a href="#bib17">17</a></sup> More practically, the three pillars of clinical excellence for anesthesiologists have been defined as availability, affability, and ability.</p>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt41-4"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;41.4</span> Commitments Inherent to Professionalism</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<tr>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Professional competence</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Honesty</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Patient confidentiality</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Appropriate relations with patients</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Improving quality of care</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Improving access to care</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Just distribution of finite resources</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Scientific knowledge</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Maintaining trust by managing conflicts of interest</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Professional responsibilities</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen736">B. The Adversarial System of Justice</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The adversarial system refers to a common law legal system whereby advocates represent their parties&#x2019; positions before an impartial person or group of people, usually a judge or jury, who attempt to determine the truth of the matters alleged. The aggrieved patient who initiates the lawsuit is the <strong><em>plaintiff</em></strong> who seeks a legal remedy from the court. If the plaintiff is successful, the court will enter judgment for the plaintiff and issue a court order for damages with the intention of making the plaintiff whole in compensation for having been wronged. The party against whom the complaint is directed is the <strong><em>defendant</em></strong>. In litigation, cases are identified by citing the plaintiff first; thus, a lawsuit is cited as &#x201C;Plaintiff v. Defendant.&#x201D; In a civil lawsuit, the burden of proof rests with the plaintiff who must establish the requisite elements of his or her case by a &#x201C;preponderance of evidence&#x201D; that all the alleged facts have been presented and are more likely than not to be true.</p>
<p class="indent">The party who initiates the lawsuit (plaintiff) must file the claim within a specified period of time, a statutorily defined and state-specific time period known as the &#x201C;statute of limitations.&#x201D; A lawsuit is formally commenced when the plaintiff&#x2019;s attorney files a complaint with the court and the clerk of the court issues a summons. A civil lawsuit in United States is initiated by filing a summons, claim form, or complaint; documents which are collectively referred to as the pleadings. Pleadings describe in detail the alleged wrongs committed by the defendant and include a demand for relief. The legal action is initiated by service of legal process by physical delivery of the pleadings to the defendant. The pleadings are then filed with the court which has jurisdiction over the parties together with an affidavit verifying that they have served on the defendant in accordance with the rules of legal procedure.</p>
<p class="indent">Typically, service of the summons is made on the defendant-provider, not on the insurer, and it is important that the provider notify the insurance carrier immediately because the defendant has only a limited period of time during which to answer the complaint. If the answer is not filed by the provider&#x2019;s defense counsel within the statutory time limits, the plaintiff can obtain a default judgment against the defendant-provider, forfeiting the right to contest the matter in court.</p>
<p class="indent">If the action is not dismissed, then both parties will begin a process of <strong><em>discovery</em></strong>. Discovery relates to the opportunity of each party to obtain relevant information<a id="page870"></a> and documents from the parties to the lawsuit. Discovery may include interrogatories, depositions of key parties, support staff, and families; chart reviews; expert reviews; determination of relevant supporting materials. Interrogatories refer to written questions served on parties; depositions represent formal oral sworn testimony obtained under oath and transcribed by a court reporter.</p>
<p class="indent">All states have trial courts where civil disputes are filed and litigated, and there is usually a system of appeals courts, with final judicial authority resting in the state court of final appeal. If the malpractice claim involves the federal government acting through a federally funded clinic or a Veteran&#x2019;s Administration Facility, then the action is filed in a federal district court. Federal courts will also hear malpractice claims when there is complete diversity of state citizenship such as when the parties are domiciled in different states or if a &#x201C;federal question&#x201D; is at issue, such as a violation of a fundamental constitutional right during the alleged negligent conduct. The place where the case is filed is usually guided by place where the incident occurred, or the residence of the parties involved, and is known as the <strong><em>venue</em></strong>.</p>
<p class="indent">At various times during the litigation process, the parties might choose to settle, attempt alternative dispute resolution such as mediation or arbitration, proffer motions for either summary judgment or dismissal, or voluntarily discontinue the action. Settlement prior to trial is generally encouraged by the courts in the interests of judicial efficiency. Medical malpractice cases frequently settle out-of-court since there are many potential advantages of doing so: (1) juries are unpredictable; (2) the negative consequences and publicity of a guilty verdict are lessened; (3) defense attorney, expert witness, and court costs are potentially lessened; and (4) the precedential impact of the verdict to future similar cases is eliminated. If the matter proceeds to trial, the court will set a trial date on the &#x201C;docket,&#x201D; or trial calendar. The defense strategy is often a complex interplay between the facts of the case, the credibility of the witnesses, the opinions of experts, and the personalities of the parties. A party generally has the right to appeal a judgment to at least one higher court, which has the power to affirm, reverse, or modify the judgment of the trial court.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">In medical malpractice cases, physicians are generally not liable for negligence for errors in judgment but can be liable for care that falls outside recognized standards of good medical practice, defined as care that a reasonably competent and skilled healthcare professional, with similar training, would provide under similar circumstances.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen737">C. Elements of Medical Malpractice, Res Ipsa, and Malpractice Insurance</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Since medicine involves decision-making of high complexity, in circumstances where not all the relevant information is available, and often during times of extreme urgency, medicine is an area of professional practice wherein the risk of adverse outcomes, and therefore of litigation, is high. Nonetheless, providers must understand that a bad outcome does not equate with medical malpractice. A provider is generally not liable for errors in judgment; rather, liability can only legitimately be inferred where the treatment rendered clearly falls outside recognized standards of good medical practice. In order to prove medical malpractice, the plaintiff must show that the provider deviated from the standard of care relevant to the specific treatment setting in question. The <strong><em>standard of care</em></strong> is further defined as that care which a reasonably competent and skilled healthcare professional, with a similar training, would have provided under similar circumstances.</p>
<p class="indent">Medical malpractice is a specific type of negligence within a group of legal causes of action known as civil torts governed by the laws of state-specific civil statutes. To be found liable under any specific cause of action, the trial court will require that the plaintiff demonstrate each legal element of that particular cause of action. The legal elements of the civil tort of medical negligence are (1) the existence of a duty; (2) a breach of that duty; (3) proof that the breach of duty was the actual and proximate cause of the adverse outcome; and (4) demonstration <a id="page871"></a>that ascertainable damages resulted as a cause of that breach. Medical malpractice usually involves issues that are beyond the usual understanding of laypersons; therefore, the courts require that the elements of malpractice including standard of care, breach, and proximate cause must be proved through expert testimony.</p>
<p class="indent">Duty is created by the provider-patient relationship and requires that the provider adhere to that degree of skill and learning ordinarily possessed and employed by other members of the same profession, who are in good standing, and are engaged in the same type of practice or specialty. In practice, however, the norms of generally accepted medical practice, which form the basis for a definition of a relevant standard of care, can be difficult to define because the medical literature is replete with controversy and new advances, and there is great variation between patients. Therefore, both plaintiff and defendant will each introduce expert opinion testimony regarding the applicable standard of care. In order to prove that the defendant-provider committed a breach of duty, the plaintiff must demonstrate that the defendant did not act in accordance with the applicable standard of care.</p>
<p class="indent">The plaintiff must prove causation by showing of a reasonably close &#x201C;causal connection&#x201D; between the alleged negligent act (or omission) and the resulting injury. The malpractice must be shown to be a &#x201C;cause in fact&#x201D; (&#x201C;actual cause&#x201D;) of the plaintiff&#x2019;s injury. However, in addition, the alleged act of malpractice must be shown to also be the proximate cause (&#x201C;legal cause&#x201D;) of the plaintiff&#x2019;s injury. The concept of legal causation can be difficult for providers to comprehend because it does not refer to a strict scientific causation. Legal causation considers both &#x201C;causation in fact&#x201D; and &#x201C;foreseeability.&#x201D; Causation in fact is defined using the &#x201C;but for&#x201D; test which requires a showing that &#x201C;but for&#x201D; the act or failure to act, the complication or injury would not have occurred. &#x201C;Foreseeability&#x201D; requires that the patient&#x2019;s injuries be a reasonably foreseeable result of the defendant-provider&#x2019;s actions.</p>
<p class="indent">The term &#x201C;damages&#x201D; attempts to quantify the actual ascertainable injuries suffered by the plaintiff. The term &#x201C;damages&#x201D; is broad and encompasses a range of financial, physical, and emotional injuries. The intent of awarding compensatory damages in a tort action is to &#x201C;make the plaintiff whole again&#x201D; which, in most medically related injuries, is an obvious legal fiction but nonetheless the best attempt at compensation. Damages can be special (eg, costs of further care, lost wages), general (noneconomic injuries such as loss of companionship, grief, pain and suffering), or punitive (if the alleged conduct can be shown to be willful, reckless, fraudulent, grossly negligent, or malicious.)</p>
<p class="indent">In the event that the elements of medical negligence cannot be proven, or the case is relatively straight-forward, a theory of medical liability can also be premised in the doctrine of &#x201C;res ipsa loquitur&#x201D; which literally translates as &#x201C;the facts speak for themselves.&#x201D; The specific elements of a &#x201C;res ipsa&#x201D; claim vary by state; however, in general, a case may be submitted to the jury on the theory of res ipsa only when the plaintiff can establish that (1) the event is one which ordinarily does not occur in the absence of negligence; (2) the event was caused by an agency or instrumentality within the exclusive control of the defendant; and (3) the event cannot have been due to any voluntary action or contribution on the part of the plaintiff.<sup><a href="#bib12">12</a></sup> Examples of res ipsa claims include retained instruments, positioning injuries, and intraoperative burns. The legal effect of res ipsa loquitur is to create a prima facie case (&#x201C;valid on its face&#x201D;) of negligence and does not usually require expert testimony.</p>
<p class="indent">Medical malpractice insurance indemnity policies provide insurance coverage for claims arising out of alleged malpractice. The malpractice carrier has two principal obligations to the insured: the duty to defend and the duty to indemnify. In<a id="page872"></a> order to provide a legal defense, an insurance carrier will typically retain knowledgeable and experienced defense counsel and pay the legal fees on behalf of the defendant-provider. The duty to indemnify requires the carrier to pay the amount of a settlement or judgment on a covered claim within the set policy limits. There are two general types of medical malpractice insurance policies: <strong><em>Occurrence policies</em></strong> which cover incidents which occur not only during the period when the policy is in effect but also if it is reported following expiration or discontinuance of that policy. <strong><em>Claims-made</em></strong> policies only cover occurrences where both the event and the claim occur during the life of the policy. Since the average malpractice claim is made 1 to 2&#x00A0;years following an incident, a provider may no longer be covered under the policy when a claim is made. Therefore, claims-made policies usually require that the provider purchase either &#x201C;nose&#x201D; or &#x201C;tail&#x201D; coverage in order to maintain coverage during job or insurer-to-insurer transitions.</p>
<p class="BIBLIOGRAPHYpTitle">References</p>
<ol class="ref"><li id="bib1">Li G, Warner M, Lang BH, Huang L, Sun LS. Epidemiology of anesthesia-related mortality in the United States, 1999-2005. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2009;110(4):759-765. PMID: 19322941.</li>
<li id="bib2">Haller G, Laroche T, Clergue F. Morbidity in anaesthesia: today and tomorrow. <em>Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol</em>. 2011;25(2):123-132. PMID: 21550538.</li>
<li id="bib3">Mazzocco K, Petitti DB, Fong KT, et al. Surgical team behaviors and patient outcomes. <em>Am J Surg</em>. 2009;197(5):678-685. PMID: 18789425.</li>
<li id="bib4">Boet S, Etherington N, Nicola D, et al. Anesthesia interventions that alter perioperative mortality: a scoping review. <em>Syst Rev</em>. 2018;7(1):218. PMID: 30497505.</li>
<li id="bib5">Cheng D, Martin J. Evidence-based practice and health technology assessment: a call for anesthesiologists to engage in knowledge translation. <em>Can J Anaesth</em>. 2011;58(4):354-363. PMID: 21264556.</li>
<li id="bib6">Szalados JE. Morality, ethics, and the law: an overview of the foundations of contemporary clinical ethical analysis. In: Szalados JE, ed. <em>Ethics and Law for Neurosciences Clinicians: Foundations and Evolving Challenges</em>. Rutgers University Press; 2019.</li>
<li id="bib7">Institute of Medicine. <em>To Err Is Human: Building a Safer Health System</em>. National Academy Press; 1999.</li>
<li id="bib8">Sutcliffe KM. High reliability organizations (HROs). <em>Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol</em>. 2011;25(2):133-144. PMID: 21550539.</li>
<li id="bib9">Chassin MR, Loeb JM. High-reliability health care: getting there from here. <em>Milbank Q</em>. 2013;91(3):459-490. PMID: 24028696.</li>
<li id="bib10">Institute of Medicine. <em>Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health System for the 21st Century</em>. National Academy Press; 2001.</li>
<li id="bib11">Cooper JB, Cullen DJ, Eichhorn JH, Philip JH, Holzman RS. Administrative guidelines for response to an adverse anesthesia event. The risk management committee of the Harvard Medical School&#x2019;s department of anaesthesia. <em>J Clin Anesth</em>. 1993;5(1):79-84. PMID: 8442975.</li>
<li id="bib12">Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. <em>Communication and Optimal Resolution (CANDOR) Toolkit</em>. 2016. Accessed September 8, 2020. <a href="http://www.ahrq.gov/professionals/quality-patient-safety/patient-safety-resources/resources/candor/introduction.html">http://www.ahrq.gov/professionals/quality-patient-safety/patient-safety-resources/resources/candor/introduction.html</a></li>
<li id="bib13">Donabedian A. The role of outcomes in quality assessment and assurance. <em>Qual Rev Bull</em>. 1992;18:356-360. PMID: 1465293.</li>
<li id="bib14">Lohr KN, Schroeder SA. A strategy for quality assurance in Medicare. <em>N Engl J Med</em>. 1990;322:1161-1171. PMID: 2406600.</li>
<li id="bib15">Haller G, Stoelwinder J, Myles PS McNeil JM. Quality and safety indicators in anesthesia: a systematic review. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2009;110(5):1158-1175. PMID: 19352148.</li>
<li id="bib16">Epstein RM, Hundert EM. Defining and assessing professional competence. <em>J Am Med Assoc</em>. 2002;287(2):226-235. PMID: 11779266.</li>
<li id="bib17">Tetzlaff JE. Anesthesiology. Professionalism in anesthesiology: &#x201C;what is it?&#x201D; or &#x201C;i know it when I see it&#x201D;. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2009;110(4):700-702. PMID: 19276965.</li></ol>
<a id="page873"></a><a id="page874"></a><a id="page875"></a><a id="page876"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp41_1" onclick="openLinkInNewTab('https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/41_Critical_Care_Medicine/index.html');">Interactive Video Lecture 41. Critical Care Medicine <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>