<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec264">XIV. Postoperative Glycemic Control</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen718">A. Hyperglycemia</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Management of diabetes can be particularly challenging in the perioperative period due to the significant stress response associated with surgery and anesthesia, perioperative holding of diabetic medications, and patients&#x2019; NPO status. Even patients without diabetes may be prone to hyperglycemia postoperatively due to a significant neuroendocrine stress response or administration of steroids or sympathomimetic medications. Postoperatively, significant hyperglycemia can put patients at risk for electrolyte disturbances, osmotic diuresis, fluid shifts, and surgical site infection. Goals of glycemic management typically involved keeping blood glucose below 180&#x00A0;mg/dL while being cautious to avoid hypoglycemia. This can be accomplished with administration of IV or SQ regular insulin. Patients with type I diabetes are at risk of developing diabetic ketoacidosis perioperatively, and therefore, it is preferable for them to continue their basal insulin dosing with close monitoring for hypoglycemia for and treatment with IV dextrose.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen719">B. Hypoglycemia</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Patients taking oral diabetic medications or insulin as well as malnourished patients are at risk of postoperative hypoglycemia due to their NPO status. Signs and symptoms of hypoglycemia may be difficult to identify in PACU patients with residual anesthetic in their system. However, it is important to have a high suspicion and rapidly recognize hypoglycemia as it may be life-threatening when severe enough. Profound hypoglycemia (&#x003C;40&#x00A0;mg/dL) can predispose patients to arrhythmias, cardiac events, or cognitive impairment. Rapid administration of IV dextrose (usually a bolus of D50) followed by infusion of a dextrose-containing crystalloid solution is typically sufficient to correct hypoglycemia.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">While significant hyperglycemia should be treated in PACU, overly aggressive correction should be avoided, as residual anesthetics can mask the symptoms of hypoglycemia.</p>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>