<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec273">III. Important Considerations in the Critically Ill Patient</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen742">A. Venous Thromboembolism</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Deep venous thrombosis (DVT) and venous thromboembolism (VTE) are common problems in critically ill patients. The incidence may be as high as 30% for DVTs and 5% for pulmonary embolism (PE) depending on the population. The pathologist Rudolph Virchow was the first to describe the combination of three factors that predispose patients to venous thrombosis. The triad of hypercoagulability, venous stasis, and vascular endothelial damage bare his name, and almost all ICU patients have at least one of these risk factors. A simple scoring system for VTE risk stratification is shown in <strong><a href="#tt42-3">Table 42.3</a></strong>. Determining VTE risk is important in that it helps in choosing prophylactic therapy and in determining the level of suspicion for VTE in individual patients.<sup><a href="ch042-sec06.xhtml#bib7">7</a></sup> <strong><em>The clinical decision of which patients to treat prophylactically and how to treat them always balances the risk of VTE with the risks of VTE prophylaxis</em></strong>, including heparin-induced thrombocytopenia and bleeding. It is generally agreed that high-risk patients without contraindications should receive prophylaxis with low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH). Patients with low to moderate risk should receive either low-dose unfractionated heparin (UFH) or LMWH. Patients with contraindications to LMWH or UFH may receive prophylaxis with mechanical devices (serial compression devices) and, in some cases, inferior vena cava (IVC) filters. But IVC filters should be reserved for the setting of high VTE risk and ongoing contraindications to anticoagulation. There is no evidence to support the routine preventive placement of IVC filters in the critically ill, including those with traumatic injuries. UFH and LMWH do not need to be routinely held prior to most surgical procedures (unless regional anesthesia is under consideration), but decisions regarding perioperative anticoagulation should be made in conjunction with the surgical team.</p>
<a id="page882"></a>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt42-3"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;42.3</span> Caprini Risk Assessment Model for Venous Thromboembolism</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:25%;"></col>
<col style="width:25%;"></col>
<col style="width:25%;"></col>
<col style="width:25%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>1 Point</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>2 Points</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>3 Points</strong></td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>5 Points</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Age 41-60&#x00A0;y</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Age 61-74&#x00A0;y</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Age &#x003E; 75&#x00A0;y</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Stroke &#x003C; 1&#x00A0;mo</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Minor surgery</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Arthroscopic surgery</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Personal history of VTE</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Elective lower extremity arthroplasty</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Body mass index &#x003E; 25&#x00A0;kg/m<sup>2</sup></p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Major open surgery &#x003E; 45 min</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Family history of VTE</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Hip, pelvis, or leg fracture</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Swollen legs</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Laparoscopic surgery &#x003E; 45 min</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Any thrombophilia</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Acute spinal cord injury &#x003C; 1&#x00A0;mo</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Varicose veins</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Bed rest &#x003E; 72 h</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Elevated serum homocysteine</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Multiple trauma &#x003C; 1&#x00A0;mo</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Pregnant or postpartum &#x003C; 1&#x00A0;mo</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Immobilizing plaster cast</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">&#x00A0;</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">History of miscarriage</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Central venous access</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">&#x00A0;</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">&#x00A0;</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Oral contraceptives or hormone replacement therapy</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">&#x00A0;</p></td>
<td class="td3" colspan="2">
<p class="tbodyleft">High Risk: &#x2265;5 points</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Intermediate Risk: 3-4 points</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Low Risk: 1-2 points</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Very Low Risk: 0 points</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Sepsis &#x003C; 1&#x00A0;mo</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">&#x00A0;</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">&#x00A0;</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">&#x00A0;</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Serious lung disease &#x003C; 1&#x00A0;mo</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">&#x00A0;</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">&#x00A0;</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">&#x00A0;</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Abnormal pulmonary function</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">&#x00A0;</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">&#x00A0;</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">&#x00A0;</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Acute myocardial infarction</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">&#x00A0;</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">&#x00A0;</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">&#x00A0;</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Congestive heart failure &#x003C; 1&#x00A0;mo</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">&#x00A0;</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">&#x00A0;</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">&#x00A0;</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">History of inflammatory bowel disease</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">&#x00A0;</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">&#x00A0;</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">&#x00A0;</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Medical patient on bed rest</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">&#x00A0;</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">&#x00A0;</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">&#x00A0;</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">VTE, venous thromboembolism.</p>
<p class="u_tfoot">Adapted from Pollak AW, McBane II RD. Succinct review of the new VTE prevention and management guidelines. <em>Mayo Clin Proc</em>. 2014;89:394-408.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">Although routine DVT screening studies are not recommended, asymptomatic DVTs are common. Thus, VTE should be considered in patients with nonspecific findings such as tachycardia, tachypnea, fever, asymmetric extremity edema, and gas exchange abnormalities. <strong><em>Compression Doppler ultrasonography</em></strong> is the most commonly used test for diagnosis of DVT. It has a good positive and negative predictive value. However, regularly scheduled screening compression Doppler ultrasonography is not generally recommended. The Wells criteria and D-dimer levels, tests commonly used in the outpatient setting, have little role in critically ill patients due to their lack of specificity.</p>
<p class="indent">The mainstay of treatment for VTE in the critically ill patient is heparin, which should be started prior to confirmatory studies if clinical suspicion is high. The advantage of UFH over LMWH in the ICU population is its titratability and rapid reversibility, which may be desirable in patients at high<a id="page883"></a> risk for bleeding and in those with renal insufficiency. In patients with PE and hemodynamic instability, chemical thrombolytic therapy or mechanical thrombectomy should be considered (if not contraindicated). Although the data supporting thrombolytic therapy for treatment of PE are limited, patients with massive PE or shock are likely to benefit.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen743">B. Nutrition</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Critical illness can lead to hypermetabolic states and an early risk of malnutrition. Poor nutritional status is associated with increased mortality and morbidity among critically ill patients. Therefore, appropriate nutrition is an important aspect of critical care, and adequate nutritional support should be considered a standard of care. The American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition regularly publishes and updates evidence-based guidelines for best nutritional practices.<sup><a href="ch042-sec06.xhtml#bib8">8</a></sup> The most recent guidelines recommend the following practices in the ICU setting:</p>
<ul class="u_bullb"><li><span>For patients suspected to be incapable of adequate volitional intake, nutritional risk based on the Nutritional Risk Screening 2002 or NUTRIC scores should be determined to identify who would benefit most from early enteral feeding. Nutrition should be initiated in the first 24 to 48 hours after ICU admission. In patients unable to take a volitional oral diet, a feeding tube should be placed.</span></li>
<li><span>Caloric needs for most patients can be predicted with a simple formula based on ideal body weight (25-30&#x00A0;kcal/kg/d). Proteins should represent 15% to 20% of this (1.2-2&#x00A0;g/kg/d). In the obese patient (body mass index &#x003E;30), permissive underfeeding at a level 60% to 70% of ideal body weight&#x2013;predicted needs is acceptable.</span></li>
<li><span>Enteral feeds should not be held for residual volumes &#x003E;500&#x00A0;mL unless there is other evidence of feeding intolerance. In the event of gastric feeding intolerance or high aspiration risk, postpyloric positioning of the feeding tube and prokinetic agents (eg, metoclopramide, erythromycin) should be considered.</span></li>
<li><span>Enteral feeds should be halted in settings of escalating vasopressor use, though may be considered in patients on stable low doses of vasopressors.</span></li>
<li><span>Total parenteral nutrition should not be used unless enteral nutrition is anticipated to be inadequate for at least 7&#x00A0;days, as parenteral nutrition is associated with increased infectious complications.</span></li></ul>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Vigilant glucose control is required in the intensive care unit to minimize morbidity associated with both hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia, although the most appropriate serum glucose range in this setting remains controversial.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen744">C. Glucose Control</h5>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><em>Hyperglycemia</em></strong> is common in critically ill patients. It can occur in both diabetics and nondiabetics. It results from both a primary increase in glucose production as well as insulin resistance due to inflammatory and hormonal mediators that are released in response to injury. It can be exacerbated by therapeutic interventions, including corticosteroids and total parenteral nutrition. Hyperglycemia is associated with increased risks of infection as well as poorer outcomes in patients with stroke, traumatic brain injury, and myocardial infarction.</p>
<p class="indent">Considering the association of hyperglycemia with negative outcomes, it is not surprising that efforts to improve outcomes by treating hyperglycemia have been made. Although targeting serum glucose levels of 80 to 110&#x00A0;mg/dL (commonly called tight control) was advocated in the past, more recent evidence suggests that this level of control is associated with significant <strong><em>hypoglycemia</em></strong> and possibly increased mortality.<sup><a href="ch042-sec06.xhtml#bib9">9</a></sup> Current serum glucose targets are<a id="page884"></a> somewhat variable, but 140 to 180&#x00A0;mg/dL is acceptable in most patients. As insulin delivery and glucose monitoring systems improve, it may become possible to safely target levels less than 140&#x00A0;mg/dL.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen745">D. Stress Ulcer Prophylaxis</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Gastric mucosal breakdown with resulting gastritis and ulceration (stress ulceration) is common in critically ill patients, but significant bleeding from the ulcerations is uncommon. Significant bleeding occurs in &#x003C;4% of high-risk patients (those with a coagulopathy, &#x003E;48 hours of mechanical ventilation, prior history of GI ulceration, sepsis, or traumatic brain, spinal cord, or burn injury) and in &#x003C;1% of patients without these risk factors. Despite this being a relatively uncommon event, the mortality from significant bleeding (requiring blood transfusion or resulting in hemodynamic instability) is &#x003E;45% and has resulted in the common use of pharmacologic agents including H<sub>2</sub> receptor antagonists, proton-pump inhibitors, and cytoprotective agents such as sucralfate for stress ulcer prophylaxis (SUP). These medications are not benign and are associated with increased costs, drug interactions, and adverse drug reactions. In addition, due to changes in the pH of gastric contents, H<sub>2</sub> receptor antagonists and proton-pump inhibitors may be associated with increased rates of pneumonia and <em>Clostridium difficile</em> infection. Considering this, routine SUP in critically ill patients is not recommended. Furthermore, enteral feeding may be a safe and more effective strategy for SUP than pharmacologic agents. Among high-risk patients, pharmacologic SUP may be considered, but no agent has been shown to be clearly superior to the others.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen746">E. Transfusion Therapy</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Anemia is common in critical illness. Most patients admitted to the ICU are anemic at some point during their hospital stay, and many will receive a blood transfusion. Although both anemia and blood transfusions are associated with mortality, it is important to note this does not imply cause and effect and may simply reflect the severity of illness. Anemia in critical illness has many causes, including blood loss from the primary injury or illness, iatrogenic blood loss due to daily blood sampling, nutritional deficiencies, and marrow suppression.</p>
<p class="indent">Transfusion thresholds are a source of ongoing debate. Historically, a hemoglobin (Hb) concentration of 10&#x00A0;g/dL was advocated. This was based on the assumption that critically ill patients have reduced physiologic reserve and require this level for adequate tissue oxygen delivery. However, red blood cell transfusion carries a risk of infection, transfusion-related acute lung injury, transfusion-associated circulatory overload, transfusion-related immunomodulation, microchimerism, and more (see <a href="ch024.xhtml">Chapter 24</a>). The undesired effects of transfusion may explain why a large, randomized, prospective trial of transfusion requirements in critical illness failed to show a mortality difference when a restrictive transfusion threshold (Hb&#x00A0;&#x003C;&#x00A0;7&#x00A0;g/dL) was compared with a more conventional threshold of &#x003C;10&#x00A0;g/dL.<sup><a href="ch042-sec06.xhtml#bib10">10</a></sup> These data strongly suggest that routine transfusion of critically ill patients is not necessary and may be harmful unless the Hb concentration is below 7&#x00A0;g/dL. Based largely on the results of this trial, most critical care guidelines now suggest a transfusion threshold of 7&#x00A0;g/dL unless there is evidence of ongoing blood loss, acute myocardial infarction, unstable angina, or possibly acute neurologic injury.</p>
<a id="page885"></a>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>