<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec268">II. Risk Management and Patient Safety</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen725">A. Ethics</h5>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><em>Ethics</em></strong> is a branch of philosophy dedicated to the study of values and customs of groups. In a contemporary context, ethics relates to discourse regarding, and the clinical application of, precepts such as right and wrong, good and evil, and norms for interactions between individuals. Since it is inevitable that disagreements will arise when individual preferences form the basis for healthcare and end-of-life decisions, ethics provides a framework within which clinicians reconcile differing beliefs and values. Thus, ethics provides an accepted structural framework through which dialogue facilitates discourse, and problem-solving in highly complex clinical dilemmas for which there are usually no clear cut answers, and for which decisions are frequently subject to retrospective scrutiny. The importance of such analysis and open dialogue is important in our increasingly diverse society since individual ethical and moral values differ. Ethics provides the theoretical foundation, the structure, and the context, with which healthcare providers can approach discussions with patients, families, and among each other regarding deeply personal topics, such as do-not-resuscitate orders, medical futility, withdrawal of life support, terminal sedation, research design and research subject protections, placebo therapy, triage and rationing, access to healthcare, patient-centered healthcare, apologies in the clinical setting, and the meaning of brain death. &#x201C;Empathy&#x201D; implies an understanding of the emotional state of the patient, whereas sympathy merely describes the provider&#x2019;s own response to the situation of patient. The concept of &#x201C;dignity&#x201D; represents a generally accepted right of humanness. Dignity in humans involves an expectation of personal respect or preservation of self-esteem; it is a fundamental starting point for any discussion of clinical ethics. Within a society characterized by diversity, open and honest, but structured, dialogue facilitates the equal weighing of differing points of view, without prejudging or arbitrarily imposing one&#x2019;s own personal values.</p>
<p class="indent">Although ethics is widely believed to represent a branch of legal doctrine, it applies equally to all professions. Nonetheless, laws apply to interactions between individuals and between individuals and society. Lawyers are trained to simultaneously manage opposing points of view and are trained to develop arguments on behalf of the client whom they are representing at the time. In<a id="page856"></a> the United States, laws are derived from the shared ethical and moral principles inherent in the Constitution. Laws, like ethical concepts, form the structure and context, within which lawyers argue the merits of their clients&#x2019; cases. The important relationship of professions with society suggests that professional values must be congruent with the societal values in which the professionals practice. Ethical decisions made in the medical context are subject to public review; that review most frequently occurs in a judicial or quasi-judicial context; for that reason, clinical ethics decisions must be as unbiased, carefully reasoned, well-documented, and as transparent as possible.</p>
<p class="indent">Aristotle distinguished &#x201C;basic wisdom&#x201D; (<strong><em>sophia</em></strong>), the ability to think about the nature of the world and discern inherent universal truths, in contrast to &#x201C;practical wisdom&#x201D; (<strong><em>phronesis</em></strong>), the capacity to consider the appropriate action needed in order to bring about changes with the intent of improving the quality of life. Thus, practical wisdom implied an ability to perceive relationships among people. Therefore, in the context of ethics, one could argue that if human dignity is the final denominator, the ethical process must harmonize scientific facts and individual choices. The goal of communication in medicine is the formation of a &#x201C;therapeutic alliance&#x201D; which facilitates shared decision-making. Many so-called ethical conflicts in clinical practice can be traced to a lack of effective communication.<sup><a href="ch041-sec04.xhtml#bib6">6</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Medical malpractice litigation is very closely linked to the perceptions of patients and families regarding honest communication, team cohesiveness, disclosure of adverse events, and, therefore, their subjective impressions regarding the quality of care. Litigation is more likely to result when there is a significant discrepancy between a patient&#x2019;s or family&#x2019;s expectations and perceptions regarding the care that was rendered. In the absence of true medical negligence, patients and families are most likely to remember the respect, care, and attentiveness (&#x201C;ethical behavior&#x201D;) they encountered during the time of the patient&#x2019;s healthcare encounter.</p>
<p class="indent">Ethical codes or &#x201C;codes of conduct&#x201D; are largely a set of aspirational values, which are the ethical guiding principles for professions. The Oath of Hippocrates and the American Medical Association&#x2019;s Principles of Medical Ethics represent such professional documents. The Principles of Medical Ethics apply equally to each and every member of the healthcare team.</p>
<p class="indent">The principle of &#x201C;beneficence&#x201D; stands for the precept that each healthcare practitioner should knowingly strive to always act in the best interest of each individual patient (<strong><em>salus aegroti suprema lex</em></strong>). Thus, healthcare decisions should reflect the highest level of care for each patient, without regard to personal gain, societal interests, or the interests of family. Beneficence also refers to the &#x201C;fiduciary duty&#x201D; of providers, as professionals, to act in their patients&#x2019; best interests, as agents on their patients&#x2019; behalf.</p>
<p class="indent">The principle of &#x201C;nonmaleficence&#x201D; is embodied in the concept of primum non nocere&#x2014;&#x201C;first, do no harm.&#x201D; Harm may be variably interpreted and includes either willful omission or commission of an act which inflicts emotional or psychological distress, pain and suffering, or physical injury. Nonmaleficence is also inherent in the fiduciary duty that is owed by providers to their patients. Nonmaleficence can become legally operative within the context of palliative sedation when the prescription may facilitate a peaceful and pain-free, albeit more expedient, death in which case the ethically and legally operative issue is that of intent. Medical interventions have inherent risks that cannot be eliminated no matter how much care and attention is rendered. Where a therapeutic intervention is prescribed with the intent of &#x201C;doing good&#x201D; <a id="page857"></a>and an unavoidable but recognized harm may ensue, this is known as the &#x201C;double effect.&#x201D; Double effect recognizes the detrimental effect of a treatment, such as respiratory depression caused by the administration of opiates for palliative sedation is well-recognized but intends that the desired effect is not respiratory depression, but rather relief from suffering. Thus, palliative sedation is ethically acceptable whereas euthanasia and assisted suicide are not; the process is similar but the intent is dichotomous.</p>
<p class="indent">The principle of &#x201C;autonomy&#x201D; addresses the patient&#x2019;s right to choose (<strong><em>voluntas aegroti suprema lex</em></strong>) and to make informed, uncoerced, voluntary decisions. Autonomy refers to each individual&#x2019;s right to self-determination. American culture has placed great importance on and has had a great respect for the principle of individual autonomy, a notion embodied in the Declaration of Independence, the United States Constitution, and the Bill of Rights. The principle of autonomy is exemplified in the obligation to obtain informed consent and also with the right to refuse medical care. Today there is increased awareness of the need to articulate one&#x2019;s need for life-sustaining treatment before one has lost decision-making capacity or the ability to articulate one&#x2019;s wishes. This has resulted in more widespread adoption of living wills, advance directives, and healthcare proxy designations. The principle of autonomy requires healthcare surrogates (proxies) to use &#x201C;substituted judgment&#x201D; in decision-making whereby the surrogate decides for the patient in accordance with what the patient would have done.</p>
<p class="indent">The principle of &#x201C;justice&#x201D; is bifurcated into distribution and retribution. Distributive justice is an ideal that concerns the hope that all are treated equally and with clear transparency with respect to access to and distribution of limited healthcare resources. Retributive justice addresses retrospective retaliation as punishment, or prospective warnings of imminent punishment as a deterrent to certain actions. In some ways, justice represents the antithesis of the principle of autonomy because where autonomy dictates that a patient&#x2019;s interests are determinative, the principle of distributive justice dictates that the provider must consider the fair allocation of resources without discrimination. Triage in emergencies and in critical care settings represents application of the principle of distributive justice. Retributive justice is largely reserved for disciplinary and legal review.</p>
<p class="indent">The principle of &#x201C;paternalism&#x201D; refers to the instinct for professionals to unilaterally make decisions on behalf of others who are incapable of doing so. Paternalism represents a value-based ethics in which the provider was universally perceived as competent, altruistic, and sincere; the provider&#x2019;s decision was universally accepted since it was widely perceived to be grounded in a fiduciary duty which in turn stemmed from extensive knowledge, training, and experience which was far beyond the understanding of a typical layperson. In its extreme form, the paternalistic provider ignores the wishes and needs of the patient and is not reconcilable with the precept of autonomy. Less obtrusively, paternalism is also manifested when the provider subconsciously withholds crucial information in the belief that bad news, such as a terminal diagnoses or a poor prognosis, might inflict undue emotional distress. Paternalistic decision-making is no longer acceptable in modern medicine.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">As a result of several high-profile cases (Nancy Cruzan, Terri Schiavo), the US Supreme Court has judged that competent persons have a constitutionally protected liberty interest to refuse medical treatment, spurring more widespread discussion and adoption of living wills, advance directives, and healthcare proxy designations.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen726">B. Medical Errors and Patient Safety</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The topics of medical error and patient safety attained national prominence in 2000 when the Institute of Medicine (IOM) published &#x201C;<em>To Err is Human: Building a Safer Health System</em>&#x201D; in which it purported that medical errors<a id="page858"></a> accounted for at least 98,000 inpatient deaths annually or at least 270 deaths daily.<sup><a href="ch041-sec04.xhtml#bib7">7</a></sup> Medical error can be defined as a mistake, inadvertent occurrence, or unintended event in healthcare delivery which may, or may not, result in patient injury. The IOM defines patient safety as &#x201C;freedom from accidental injury.&#x201D;</p>
<p class="indent">Anesthesiology has a long history of leadership in quality and safety and was the first specialty to adopt a national standard for safety improvements. In the mid-20th century, coincident with the blossoming of formal training in anesthesia and establishment of board certification, studies reported that a significant number of anesthetic deaths could be attributed to anesthetic mismanagement. The majority of errors in anesthetic care could be attributed to preventable human error whereas a minority were deemed due to other factors such as faulty equipment, inexperience, poor communication among personnel, haste, and distraction. If one excludes errors due to intentional violation of rules, most errors by providers can be traced to error-prone systems. As an example, the anesthesiologist who administers the wrong medication because its packaging has been changed. Many errors are unrecognized, such as &#x201C;near misses.&#x201D; Although they may be pervasive, they may remain undiscovered with high potential for future repetition. In general, the more complex the system, the greater the potential for error. Complex systems share common characteristics: high-level technical requirements, the need for quick reaction times, 24 hours per day operations, fatigue, production pressure which frequently involve trade-offs between personnel, and multidisciplinary team coordination.</p>
<p class="video"><video data-id="6K3SmvKE" controls="controls" class="jwp-video" crossorigin="anonymous" style="width:100%; height:auto; width:320px; height:240px;">Browser issues</video></p>
<p class="video1" id="vid41-2"><strong>VIDEO 41.2</strong></p>
<p class="video2"><strong>Accident Causation</strong></p>
<p class="indent">The medical model for team coordination has its origins in the aviation industry which developed the &#x201C;crew resource management&#x201D; (CRM) paradigm in 1978; this later evolved onto a clinical multimodality model of patient safety. (<strong><a href="#tt41-1">Table 41.1</a></strong>). CRM fosters an organizational culture which encourages each team member to respectfully question authority while preserving authority and chain of command. CRM encompasses knowledge, skills, and attitudes including communications, situational awareness, problem-solving, decision-making, and teamwork. CRM is a team management system which makes optimum use of all available resources including equipment, procedures, and people in order to promote safety and enhance operational efficiency. The CRM model has now permeated healthcare in the form of a &#x201C;safety culture&#x201D; which universally establishes safety as an organizational priority by fostering teamwork, patient involvement, transparency, and accountability. CRM has become an integral part of anesthesiology simulator training. A successful safety culture is characterized by <a id="page859"></a>leadership vision and commitment, shared core values and goals, consistency, nonpunitive responses to adverse events and errors, and promotion of safety through continuous education and training.</p>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt41-1"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;41.1</span> The Structure of Crew Resource Management</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<tr>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Communication: Leadership and team management</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Workload management: Mission planning, stress management, and workload distribution</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Decision-making: Integration and proceduralization (standard operating procedure)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Conflict resolution</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Leadership</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Team management</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Stress management</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="indent">The importance of teamwork is further exemplified by the high-reliability organization (HRO). An HRO is one that has succeeded in avoiding catastrophes despite a high level of risk and complexity.<sup><a href="ch041-sec04.xhtml#bib8">8</a></sup> Classical examples of HROs include nuclear power plants, air traffic control systems, and naval aircraft carriers. HROs are characterized by five common practices: (1) sensitivity to operations; (2) reluctance to accept &#x201C;simple&#x201D; explanations for problems; (3) a preoccupation with failure; (4) emphasis on expertise; and (5) resilience. Healthcare organizations have recently moved to adopt the HRO mindset, but some experts caution that the methodology through which HROs generate and maintain high levels of safety may not be directly applied to healthcare. Rather, they recommend incremental changes which healthcare systems could use to progress toward high reliability: (1) leadership&#x2019;s commitment to achieving zero patient harm; (2) a fully functional culture of safety throughout the organization; and (3) the widespread deployment of highly effective process improvement tools.<sup><a href="ch041-sec04.xhtml#bib9">9</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Multiple healthcare agencies promote patient safety and reduction of medical error. In 1986, the Anesthesia Patient Safety Foundation was formed and became the first-ever foundation dedicated to patient safety. It was the model for the National Patient Safety Foundation. The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) is the federal agency charged with promotion of patient safety in healthcare. The AHRQ also coordinates the Patient Safety Task Force which is a collaboration of agencies with regulatory and data collection responsibilities including the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and its National Electronic Disease Surveillance System, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) and state Quality improvement organizations, and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Finally, The Joint Commission uses evidence of an institutional commitment to patient safety as an accreditation criterion.</p>
<p class="indent">The Institute of Medicine has defined 10 recommendations for improving both quality of care and patient safety: (1) care based on continuous healing relationships; (2) customization based on patient needs and values; (3) establishment of the patient as the source of control; (4) shared knowledge and the free flow of information; (5) evidence-based decision-making; (6) safety as a priority; (7) transparency; (8) anticipation of needs; (9) continuous reduction of waste; and (10) cooperation among clinicians.<sup><a href="ch041-sec04.xhtml#bib10">10</a></sup></p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen727">C. Informed Consent</h5>
<p class="nonindent">A separate and distinct documentation of informed consent for anesthesia and for anesthesia-related procedures is widely held to be the standard. Each patient&#x2019;s right to refuse a proposed intervention; to place limits, restrictions, or conditions on treatment; or to disregard the advice of a provider altogether are all corollaries of the informed consent doctrine. Providers should understand and respect the fact that what may be consented to may also be refused. Documentation of &#x201C;refusal to consent&#x201D; is equally important as the documentation of informed consent to treatment.</p>
<p class="indent">The doctrine of informed consent is premised on the ethical principle of autonomy which obliges providers to respect patients&#x2019; right to bodily self-determination and therefore share medical decision-making authority with patients. The cornerstone of valid informed consent is effective communication&#x2014;a two-way dialogue. There are two distinct legal standards which are <a id="page860"></a>applied to the informed consent process: the reasonable provider standard or the reasonable patient standard.</p>
<p class="indent">The reasonable patient standard is more commonly applied, is consistent with a respect for patient autonomy, and requires disclosure of that relevant information which a typical and reasonable patient would want to know in order to make an informed decision. The process of informed consent requires disclosure and discussion of all material risks, benefits, and alternatives to proposed therapeutic or investigational interventions.</p>
<p class="indent">All disclosure standards require that information and choices be presented comprehensively and in clear terms, with a concomitant explanation of the meaning of the terms, potential short-term and long-term implications of each option, discussions regarding the option to change the plan of care at a later time, the implications of such withdrawal, and reassurance that such decisions will be respected. The dialogue, including an opportunity for patients to ask questions and receive honest answers regarding the proposed treatment, should occur in an atmosphere devoid of any sense of duress or coercion in order for the consent to be truly valid.</p>
<p class="indent">Finally, after all disclosures have been made, the options considered, and the accord reached, the signed form within the record will represent the formal documentation of the process. Consent is therefore somewhat analogous to a contract which requires truthful disclosure, consideration, and acceptance and which then subsequently outlines expectations but also imposes duties and obligations on the parties. Similar to contracts, there are potential legal challenges regarding the validity of the consent/contract; such challenges include fraudulent facts or pretenses, duress, lack of capacity, or impaired judgment. A legally competent patient is one who is legally able to make decisions on his or her own behalf. Unemancipated minors, the mentally challenged, or the permanently disabled are possible examples of patients who may lack competency for autonomous decision-making, and therefore, family or court-appointed guardians will make decisions on their behalf. The term &#x201C;capacity&#x201D; refers to an impairment in decision-making which is more situational in context, such as use of medications that impair judgment and reasoning; metabolic disturbances; or mental states such as depression, mania, psychosis, and delirium or confusion.</p>
<p class="indent">The majority of states have statutory requirements regarding informed consent, where failure to comply with statutory requirements for informed consent can put the provider at risk for a charge of professional misconduct. Medicare conditions of participation and The Joint Commission also separately mandate informed consent. If a course of medical care is litigated for any reason, the lack of documented informed consent can compromise the legal defensibility of that case. A patient can also bring an action against a provider in civil court based on lack of consent premised either as negligent nondisclosure or medical battery. Because battery is not considered to be medical malpractice, providers may not be covered under their medical liability insurance policies for cases alleging battery.</p>
<p class="indent">The doctrine of &#x201C;implied consent&#x201D; can sometimes address the relatively common clinical situation where the provider could reasonably infer that a patient would have consented to the treatment. Implied consent is essentially a matter of the provider&#x2019;s reasonable interpretation of the overall patient&#x2019;s conduct to be consistent with an intention to authorize a procedure, even though express consent to treatment is lacking. Implied consent should be reserved<a id="page861"></a> for emergency care and situations where informed consent from a patient or surrogate is either very impracticable or impossible.</p>
<p class="indent">In the instance where a previously competent patient, or a patient with capacity, has clearly expressed their directives, these directives remain binding even after the patient loses competence or capacity. For example, in the case of an adult Jehovah&#x2019;s Witness patient who expressly refuses blood transfusion, with a directive clearly documented in the record, most courts have held the family cannot overrule the patient&#x2019;s decision after he or she loses capacity.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen728">D. Importance of the Medical Record</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The medical record is a document which serves medical, legal, and business purposes; it is an ongoing record of treatment which is used to record and communicate the circumstances of patient care to other providers, to substantiate and justify the medical reasoning involved in reaching a diagnosis and determining a plan of care, and to support a claim for reimbursement. The medical record is legally the work product of the healthcare team (<strong>Table&#x00A0;41.2</strong>). There are two aspects of medical records: the physical chart and the information contained in them. The patient has two types of legal rights to his or her medical information: a right of possession and a right of confidentiality. The physical chart is the property of the medical provider who is the legal custodian of the chart and assumes responsibility for its integrity, whereas the information contained within the medical record is legally the property of the patient.</p>
<p class="indent">With widespread adoption of the electronic medical record (EMR), there are new risks for providers and institutions. The risk for breach of confidentiality is enhanced with EMRs mainly because (1) unprotected (lost or unencrypted) portable devices can store and access data remotely; (2) the potential for unauthorized access to repositories of records through &#x201C;hacking&#x201D;&#x2019; is substantial; and (3) electronic data transmission can disseminate confidential data faster and further than was possible with photocopy or fax technologies in the past. Many doctrines, laws, regulations, and policies address the confidentiality of medical information; the most widely recognized of which are the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) and the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act of 2009 (HiTECH) which address the privacy of personally identifiable health information, and security concerns associated with the electronic transmission of health information and penalties for violations for unauthorized disclosures, respectively. HiTECH has also mandated providers and health systems to provide patients with unfettered access to their EMR records.</p>
<p class="indent">The metadata embedded within EMRs provide details regarding the records and images accessed for review, the time and duration of document review<a id="page862"></a> and record entry, and changes made. Thus, a detailed log of the exact data and documentation reviewed by a clinician during a patient&#x2019;s evaluation can be retrospectively reconstructed in the event of a lawsuit. Late entries may sometimes be necessary; however, late entries after a bad outcome will be challenged as self-serving and defensive. Templates, checkboxes, and pull-down menus should be reviewed for inaccurate default entries. Typographical errors and word-recognition transcription errors are common: on one hand, errors can be reflective of inattention to detail; on the other hand, some errors are inevitable in the clinical production environment and the mind will frequently autocorrect for recently dictated errors. Nonetheless, a clear and organized narrative will still best reflect the clinician&#x2019;s thought process, differential diagnosis, and clinical judgment and represents a defensible clinical work-product. Providers must be cognizant that when they &#x201C;copy&#x201D; and &#x201C;paste&#x201D; information from one patient encounter to another they are acknowledging that everything was entirely the same in both visits. Also, they must be cognizant that signing prepopulated checklists, such as parts of a physical examination, legally implies that every checked item on that list has, indeed, been undertaken.</p>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt41-2"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;41.2</span> Purposes of the Medical Record</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<tr>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Written documentation of the healthcare encounter</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Basis for longitudinal comparisons of a patient&#x2019;s clinical course over time</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Communication and continuity of care among the healthcare team</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Basis for coding and billing claims in support of reimbursement for services</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Utilization review</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Peer review and quality of care evaluations</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Collection of research data</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen729">E. Responding to an Adverse Event</h5>
<p class="nonindent">A serious adverse perioperative event, especially one which results in severe disability or death to an otherwise healthy patient during elective surgery, can have tremendous psychological impact on the anesthesia care team. Since such events are likely to be rare occurrences during a single practice career, the Anesthesia Patient Safety Foundation has developed an Adverse Event Protocol (AEP) to facilitate an effective, efficient, and coordinated response to a perioperative incident.<sup><a href="ch041-sec04.xhtml#bib11">11</a></sup> The AEP represents a &#x201C;standard operating procedure&#x201D; whereby the response to an incident is a standardized reasonable best practice, obviating the need to improvise or reinvent protocols for each individual circumstance. The AEP can be divided into a series of components: (1) communication and coordination which is designated to an incident commander who assumes administrative direction and control over the event and coordinates the involvement of consultants and the notification of departmental leadership, administrators, and family members; (2) preservation of evidence which is designed to sequester drugs and equipment to subsequently rule out contamination or malfunction in such a way as to provide credibly unspoiled evidence for later review; (3) debriefing and documentation support which promotes clear, complete, factual, and objective memorialization of the events for the medical record; and (4) subsequent peer review. The verbal, written, and behavioral responses of involved providers after a perioperative incident have potentially enormous legal ramifications: (1) statements made to peers and support staff are discoverable and may be later admitted into evidence against the provider unless they occur in a protected setting; (2) written documentation which is not objective can later be scrutinized and found to be misleading or self-serving; and (3) &#x201C;cleaning up&#x201D; the workstation may either result in loss of important evidence (ie, turning off monitors and machines can wipe temporary electronic memory) or be construed as intentional spoliation (intentional loss or destruction) of evidence. A well-designed AEP is communicated to all members of the anesthesia care team before any incident occurs; has been sanctioned by providers, administrators, and legal counsel; and is protocolized and automatically triggered.</p>
<p class="indent">The formal discussion of the circumstances surrounding an adverse event has come to be known as &#x201C;disclosure.&#x201D; The term &#x201C;disclosure&#x201D; is most <a id="page863"></a>frequently used in the context of a disclosure of a medical error; however, disclosure of the circumstances relating to an adverse event which results in patient harm frequently occurs before it is clear that a medical error did in fact occur. Transparency and truthfulness is widely recognized as an ethical tenet and therefore a professional responsibility of providers. The American Medical Association Code of Ethics, the National Quality Forum, the National Patient Safety Foundation, and The Joint Commission have each either endorsed or have issued statement mandating disclosure. Specifically, The Joint Commission accreditation standards require providers to inform patients about &#x201C;unanticipated outcomes.&#x201D; However, it is widely recognized that identification and scrutiny of error with implementation of a corrective feedback loop (&#x201C;root cause analysis&#x201D; or &#x201C;RCA&#x201D;) is a critical mechanism to enhance patient safety; the dissemination of specific data regarding an adverse event or medical error has administrative and legal implications to both providers and institutions.</p>
<p class="indent">Numerous, but not well-controlled, studies have suggested that patients are more likely to seek legal counsel to explore their legal rights and to bring suit in the absence of a formal explanation or apology, presumably because of an innate sense of suspicion and a need to reach closure. The legal quandary with respect to disclosure meetings is that potentially self-implicating statements made during such meetings can be later discovered by plaintiff attorneys and admitted into evidence. Medicolegal liability from disclosure can be increased in the following ways: (1) Disclosure may inevitably put patients and families on notice that an undesirable outcome or injury was the result of a mishap or medical error and not a consequence of the disease process or other unavoidable complication of treatment. (2) Medical malpractice insurance policies frequently contain a &#x201C;cooperation&#x201D; or &#x201C;duty to cooperate&#x201D; clause which requires the insured to cooperate with the insurer&#x2019;s best efforts to defend against a claim. A common stipulation within such a clause maintains that an admission of liability to an injured party may nullify the policy coverage for the event. (3) Legal evidentiary rules categorize an admission of guilt is considered to be a &#x201C;statement against one&#x2019;s own interest&#x201D; and are excepted from rules regarding hearsay rules.</p>
<p class="indent">There is currently an expanding national interest in so-called Communication and Resolution Program (CRP) approaches to the management of an unexpected complication of medical care (ie, medical error). CRPs call for institutions to promote a culture of nonpunitive reporting of adverse events, thorough investigation of adverse events, proactive and honest explanation of what happened to patients and families, use of this experience to improve patient safety and prevent the recurrence of such incidents, and, when appropriate, an apology and offer of fair compensation to the patient or family. In 2016, the federal Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality published a &#x201C;toolkit&#x201D; (CANDOR) of best practices for instituting CRP.<sup><a href="ch041-sec04.xhtml#bib12">12</a></sup> Early results show that application of CRP in cases of medical error results in greater patient satisfaction and reduced litigation.</p>
<p class="indent">With the intent of facilitating truthful communication between providers and patients, some states have enacted &#x201C;apology statutes&#x201D; which are &#x201C;safe harbors&#x201D; designed to protect providers who apologize to patients for medical errors. Under an &#x201C;apology statute,&#x201D; expressions of apology are excluded from discoverable evidence in the event of a malpractice claim. Apology statutes permit &#x201C;offers of expressions of grief&#x201D; and are primarily intended to encourage open communication through informal conversations between the patient/family <a id="page864"></a>and the healthcare provider. There are two forms of apology statutes: (1) sympathy statutes which protect providers&#x2019; expressions of sympathy, regret, and condolences; and (2) admission of fault statutes which, in addition, protect admissions of fault and error. Of the states which have enacted apology statutes, most have adopted the sympathy statute only; moreover, 14 states at present have not enacted any form of apology statute. In general, although it is sound practice for medical staff to adhere to regulatory and administrative policies and procedures mandating disclosure of medical errors, it is equally important that the circumstances surrounding the discussion are carefully controlled to the extent possible. Legal advice should be sought before a disclosure policy is implemented, and legal opinion should be obtained prior to a formal disclosure meeting.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Apology statutes vary by state and are of two types: sympathy statutes, which protect physicians&#x2019; expressions of sympathy, regret, and condolences, and admission of fault statutes, which protect physicians&#x2019; admissions of fault or error.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen730">F. National Practitioner Data Bank</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The National Practitioner Data Bank (NPDB) was created in 1990 and represents a federal data repository to collect and maintain quality-related information about healthcare providers (<strong><a href="#tt41-3">Table 41.3</a></strong>). The NPDB serves as a central data clearinghouse which collects and releases information related to the professional conduct and competence of physicians, nurses, dentists, and other healthcare practitioners. The intent of the NPDB is to support professional peer review by requiring hospitals, state licensing boards, professional societies, and other healthcare entities to report adverse actions against providers and also to query the databank as part of the credentialing and privileging process. The NPDB contains information about healthcare practitioners&#x2019; malpractice history, adverse licensure actions, restrictions on professional membership, and negative privileging actions by hospitals. It is important to realize that uncontested adverse actions such as settlements before judgment in malpractice litigation, uncontested denials for medical staff credentialing, and resignations from medical staff while a peer review investigation is ongoing are all reportable to the NPDB.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen731">G. Advance Directives</h5>
<p class="nonindent">An advance directive is a statement of instruction (usually, but not always in written form) which, when written, is anticipated to potentially take effect at some point in the future. The purpose of an advance directive is to make one&#x2019;s wishes known to others, in the event that one later loses the ability to communicate, so that one&#x2019;s wishes can be known and respected. <a id="page865"></a>Advance directives represent a practical application of the ethical principle respecting autonomous decision-making. Examples of advance directives include living wills and healthcare proxies, durable powers of attorney, general do-not-resuscitate requests, or the specific documentation of preferences for interventions such as prolonged mechanical ventilation, artificial nutrition and hydration, or dialysis in the event of severe incapacitating injury.</p>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt41-3"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;41.3</span> Examples of Events Reportable to the National Practitioner Databank</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<tr>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Medical malpractice payments</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Healthcare-related civil or criminal actions</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Adverse licensure actions</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Revocation, reprimand, censure, suspension, probation, voluntary surrender</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Adverse clinical privileging actions</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Adverse professional society membership actions</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Drug Enforcement Administration actions</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Exclusions from Federal- or State-funded healthcare programs</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Private accreditation organization actions</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Other due-process adjudications pertinent to healthcare</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="indent">A &#x201C;living will&#x201D; is a common form of advance directive which defines a patient&#x2019;s expectations from providers and the healthcare system; it almost always delineates specific or general parameters for the initiation, continuation, or termination of various levels of life-sustaining medical treatment. Living wills can be prepared by either the patient alone or, more often, in consultation with either his or her provider and/or attorney. A principal practical limitation of living wills is that very few such documents are of sufficient specificity so as to unequivocally define a patient&#x2019;s wishes for all contingencies. Thus, most living wills are practically little more than a general guide to patients&#x2019; wishes. Thus, even when a living will is available, the patient&#x2019;s surrogate decision-makers are still tasked with the interpretation of the patient&#x2019;s wishes in that specific circumstance.</p>
<p class="indent">A healthcare proxy is a surrogate decision-maker who is specifically and legally appointed by the patient, by way of a written designation, for the purpose of making healthcare decisions on his or her behalf. The healthcare proxy need not be a relative, and therefore, a healthcare proxy supersedes statutorily defined surrogacy hierarchies. The proxy or surrogate is merely conveying indirectly the wishes and directions of the patient and should not engage in unilateral decision-making. In the absence of a previously designated healthcare proxy, providers should consult their state laws regarding &#x201C;statutes of surrogacy&#x201D; which define the hierarchy of decision-makers who can speak on a patient&#x2019;s.</p>
<p class="indent">A &#x201C;power of attorney&#x201D; is a legal document empowering another with authority of agency or the authority to act in one&#x2019;s place. Powers of attorney can be specific to financial, administrative, or healthcare matters or may be more general and even unrestricted. Simple powers of attorney are in effect only as long as the patient also has capacity to make decisions and become void when a patient loses decision-making capacity. On the other hand, a &#x201C;durable power of attorney&#x201D; is a more powerful document which retains its effect even after a patient loses decision-making capacity. Again, even durable powers of attorney may be restricted in scope and may not necessarily extend to healthcare decisions.</p>
<p class="indent">Advance directives also include orders regarding preferences for resuscitation. &#x201C;Do Not Resuscitate&#x201D; (DNR) or &#x201C;Do Not Attempt Resuscitation&#x201D; (DNAR) orders represent provider orders which are based upon the completion of a standardized form which outlines a patient&#x2019;s resuscitation preferences. The DNR form is similar to the living will, but it is more specific and is frequently a legal form designed and regulated by individual state statutes. While the living will is usually broad and somewhat aspirational, the DNR form is subject to little or no discretion for interpretation. DNR forms closely resemble a &#x201C;refusal to consent&#x201D; to treatment since they specify a limitation of medical care. The general legal and ethical considerations that apply to the informed consent process also apply to end-of-life discussions and the DNR order&#x2014;for a DNR to be legally valid, it must<a id="page866"></a> be obtained after full disclosure in a competent patient with capacity and without duress or coercion. Patients who have lost the capacity to understand the implications of their decisions, or those that are suicidal or clinically depressed, are not typically viewed as being in a position to consent to or refuse treatment.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>