<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec253">III. Postoperative Weakness</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen710">A. Generalized Weakness</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Many procedures performed in the operating room require patients to undergo muscle relaxation with neuromuscular blocking agents (NMBA). Residual weakness from the use of these agents has historically been associated in<a id="page838"></a> anesthesia literature with increased morbidity and mortality, with higher intraoperative doses of these agents linked to a higher risk of postoperative complications.<sup><a href="ch040-sec16.xhtml#bib5">5</a></sup> During the period between extubation and recovery of a train of four (TOF) ratio of 0.9, the patient is at risk of decreased respiratory effort, worsened atelectasis, impaired protective airway reflexes, increased risk of aspiration events, increased risk of hypoxia, and reintubation. It is therefore imperative to monitor for signs of residual weakness in the PACU.</p>
<p class="indent">A 2016 study revealed a relative incidence ratio for postoperative pneumonia of 1.79 in patients receiving NMBA when compared to those that did not, while a failure to reverse NMBAs at the end of a case was associated with an increased incidence ratio for pneumonia of 2.25.<sup><a href="ch040-sec16.xhtml#bib6">6</a></sup> Despite evidence that failure to antagonize NMBA at the end of surgery leads to a TOF ratio &#x003C;0.7 on arrival to the PACU, in clinical practice, many anesthesiologists report that they do not routinely give NMBA reversal agents at the end of a case. Reasons given for avoiding anticholinesterase medications include concerns for hemodynamic changes, postoperative nausea and vomiting, and paradoxical weakness from an overly large dose of neostigmine, as well as the finding of &#x201C;no fade&#x201D; with the use of a qualitative twitch monitor. It should be noted that most providers fail to detect fade once the TOF ratio is above 0.4&#x2014;well below the 0.9 required for the patient to avoid postoperative complications.</p>
<p class="indent">Any patient for whom there is concern for incomplete or absent reversal of NMBA should receive an anticholinesterase agent or sugammadex (a selective aminosteroid-binding agent) in the PACU. This is especially important for high-risk populations such as the frail and elderly, and patients with a history of myasthenia gravis, for whom it is necessary to identify the last dose of their home anticholinesterase agent and make sure that it is administered on schedule. There are some data to support the notion that these high-risk populations should preferentially be reversed with sugammadex if they have received an intraoperative aminosteroid NMBA.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Residual neuromuscular blockade is an underappreciated phenomenon in PACU and is associated with increased risk of postoperative pneumonia.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen711">B. Focal Weakness</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The PACU is where patients may first exhibit signs of having sustained an intraoperative positioning injury. The most common of these is injury to the ulnar nerve, followed in prevalence by injury to the peroneal nerve. Signs and symptoms should be carefully evaluated and documented. Most such injuries will improve with time, but follow-up with a neurologist should be considered. Persistent lower extremity weakness following spinal surgery or neuraxial anesthesia needs to be evaluated with an MRI in order to rule out the presence of an epidural hematoma.</p>
<p class="indent">Certain procedures such as carotid endarterectomy and intraoperative events such as severe hypertension or hypotension can put patients at increased risk for hemorrhagic, ischemic, or embolic stroke. This diagnosis should be considered in patients with new focal postoperative neurologic deficits, aphasia, or with other unexplained neurologic changes while in PACU. Rapid recognition and notification of appropriate services is essential to provide timely management and intervention.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>