<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec278">II. Extracorporeal Shock Wave Lithotripsy</h4>
<p class="nonindent">In the United States, 12% of the population will experience renal calculi in their lifetimes. The optimal therapy is based on the size of the stone (&#x003C;4.0&#x00A0;mm usually pass spontaneously), location in the urinary tract, and stone composition. Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL) can be used for disintegration of urinary stones in the kidney and upper part of the ureters. It has the advantages of being minimally invasive, performed on an outpatient basis, and associated with minimal perioperative morbidity.</p>
<p class="indent">The original, first-generation lithotripter required the patient to be placed in a hydraulically supported gantry chair and immersed in a water bath&#x2014;the so called most expensive bathtub in the world.<sup><a href="ch043-sec06.xhtml#bib6">6</a></sup> Modern lithotripters do not require water immersion, simplifying the procedure and eliminating the many adverse effects and difficulties of water immersion. The lithotripter is positioned to contact the patient&#x2019;s flank posteriorly. Shock waves are then applied that traverse the skin and deep tissue targeting the culprit stone. As a result, most <strong><em>ESWL</em></strong> procedures can be done on an outpatient basis and rarely require deep sedation or general anesthesia.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Most ESWL can be done on an outpatient basis and rarely require deep sedation or general anesthesia.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">There are several known absolute and relative contraindications for lithotripsy. Absolute contraindications include pregnancy, untreated urosepsis or urinary tract infections, uncorrected coagulopathy, and ureteral obstruction distal to the stone. Some relative contraindications include uncontrolled hypertension, abdominal aortic aneurysms, obesity, renal insufficiency, and pacemakers. Patients with a pacemaker or internal cardiac defibrillator can safely undergo lithotripsy provided the pacemaker is set to the asynchronous mode (if the patient&#x2019;s normal heart rate is pacemaker dependent) and the defibrillator is turned off during the procedure. Renal parenchymal damage is<a id="page902"></a> believed to be responsible for the hematuria that occurs in nearly all patients, whereas subcapsular hematoma is seen in only 0.5% of patients after lithotripsy. A decrease in postoperative hematocrit should arouse suspicion of a large perinephric hematoma. Up to 10% of patients have significant urinary tract colic, occasionally requiring hospitalization and opioid analgesics. Shock wave lithotripsy can cause damage to adjacent tissues such as the lungs and pancreas. Despite the wide array of potential complications, mortality after ESWL is extremely low.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Pregnancy, uncorrected coagulopathy, and obstruction distal to the renal calculi are contraindications to lithotripsy.</p>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>