<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec256">VI. Obstructive Sleep Apnea</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Patients with OSA can make up a significant portion of patients in the PACU. They are at an elevated risk of apneic episodes and airway obstruction in the postoperative period. Severe hypoxia can result from the combination of airway obstruction and decreased FRC. These patients need to be identified early, either through preoperative testing or using a high-sensitivity scoring system to identify at-risk patients<sup><a href="ch040-sec16.xhtml#bib8">8</a></sup> (<strong><a href="#tt40-3">Table 40.3</a></strong>).</p>
<a id="page841"></a>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt40-3"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;40.3</span> Identifying Patients at Risk of Obstructive Sleep Apnea</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:50%;"></col>
<col style="width:50%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Physical Characteristics</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">BMI &#x003E; 35&#x00A0;kg/m<sup>2</sup></p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Presence of large tonsils</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Craniofacial malformations</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Large neck circumference</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Male</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Clinical Symptoms</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Loud/frequent snoring</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Observed apnea events while sleeping</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Awakens frequently from sleep</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Frequent daytime somnolence</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Easily falls asleep when not stimulated (eg, on sofa watching TV)</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">BMI, body mass index.</p>
<p class="u_tfoot">Adapted from American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Perioperative Management of Patients With Obstructive Sleep Apnea. Practice Guidelines for the perioperative management of patients with obstructive sleep apnea: an updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Perioperative Management of patients with obstructive sleep apnea. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2014;120(2):268-286.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">Analgesic regimens should be carefully planned in these patients as the use of sedatives and opioids increases the risk of respiratory depression and airway obstruction. Regional techniques and adjunct medications should be used to minimize opioid requirements. If a patient controlled analgesia is prescribed for pain, a background infusion should be avoided. It is reasonable to use supplemental O<sub>2</sub> in these patients postoperatively to support oxygenation, but it should be kept in mind that this could potentially increase the length of apneic episodes and disguise hypoventilation. All postoperative patients with OSA should be monitored with continuous pulse oximetry, and this should continue after transfer out of the PACU on the floor. Strong consideration should be given to initiating CPAP for any patient who has evidence of persistent hypoxemia or obstruction without surgical contraindication. OSA patients who use home CPAP should be encouraged to bring their machine to the hospital on the day of surgery so they can use it in the postoperative period. Other simple maneuvers to minimize hypoxia and airway obstruction include positioning in a nonsupine position such as sitting or on their sides.</p>
<p class="indent">The decision to discharge a patient with OSA home after surgery requires careful consideration. Patients should not be discharged home until they are no longer felt to be at increased risk of postoperative respiratory depression, and this may require a longer PACU stay than their non-OSA counterparts. Before discharge, patients should be able to maintain oxygen saturations without supplemental O<sub>2</sub> in an unstimulating environment. On discharge, they should be instructed to be compliant with their home CPAP (if used) for naps and overnight. They should also be given advice on the use of adjunct, simple pain medications, and advised to minimize any opioid use. Day surgery patients with OSA who are hypoxic in the PACU or score as high risk should be admitted to the hospital for observation (<strong><a href="ch040-sec07.xhtml#tt40-4">Table 40.4</a></strong>).</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">High-risk OSA patients should be considered for overnight observation instead of being routinely discharged home from PACU.</p>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>