<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec279">III. Percutaneous Renal Procedures</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Percutaneous nephrostomy (PCN) is a procedure that uses ultrasound guidance to percutaneously puncture the renal pelvis, creating a nephrostomy tract. PCN is used to diagnose and treat a wide variety of urologic problems, including relief of renal obstruction, stone removal, biopsy of tumors, and ureteral stent placement.</p>
<p class="indent">Nephroscopy involves passing an endoscope through the nephrostomy tract to examine the kidney. For this procedure, the patient is placed in the oblique prone position and provided local anesthesia and intravenous sedation. Percutaneous nephrolithotomy, a procedure to remove renal calculi too large to be treated with lithotripsy, is one of the most common urologic endosurgical procedures. Anesthesia (general or regional) is required for dilatation of the nephrostomy tract.</p>
<p class="indent">Although percutaneous surgical techniques are considerably less invasive than open surgical procedures, a variety of complications can occur depending on location and size of the tract and surgical time. During insertion of the nephrostomy tube, trauma to adjacent structures such as the spleen, liver, and colon can result in acute blood loss necessitating an emergency open surgical procedure. Lung and pleural injury may occur during nephrostomy tract placement when access is created above the 12th rib or when the kidney lies in a more cephalad position than normal. In order to improve the surgical field for the surgeon during nephroscopy, continuous irrigation of fluid through the endoscope is necessary. Extravasation of irrigation fluid into the retroperitoneal, intraperitoneal, intravascular, or pleural spaces is possible and can result in electrolyte abnormalities, fluid overload, hypothermia, and anemia.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>