<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/jquery.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
<!--<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-1.10.2.min.js'></script>-->
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-migrate-1.2.1.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery.qtip.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/etext.js'></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec288">VI. Fire Safety</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Although considered a rare event in the OR, OR fires present a steady danger to both patients and staff and are more common than expected. There are about 600 reported OR fires per year,<sup><a href="#bib9">9</a></sup> and 90% of these are started secondary to electrocautery.<sup><a href="#bib9">9</a>,<a href="#bib10">10</a></sup> The fire triad&#x2014;oxidizer, ignition, fuel&#x2014;is commonly known, but recommendations on how to manage OR fires are strictly based on case reports, with no data driven management plan available.</p>
<p class="indent">Igniting a fire requires the presence of each element of the &#x201C;fire triad&#x201D; &#x2014;a source of ignition, a fuel to burn, and an oxidizer.<sup><a href="#bib11">11</a></sup> The most common sources of ignition are ESUs<sup><a href="#bib9">9</a></sup>; these are usually under the control of the surgical team. Multiple types of ESUs exist and deliver energy using various energy types, like<a id="page919"></a> thermal energy versus radiofrequency energy.<sup><a href="#bib12">12</a></sup> The most common types are the monopolar, the bipolar, and ultrasound.</p>
<p class="indent">Ignition can occur via the device itself or human tissue heating to a point where a fire is possible. For example, even though ultrasonic devices do not transfer heat directly to tissue, they can raise tissue temperature to over 200 &#x00B0;C,<sup><a href="#bib12">12</a></sup> increasing the risk of fire. Monopolar and bipolar devices both rely on direct heat transfer, but an advantage exists with a bipolar device. The development of a spark is minimized with a bipolar device, as the electrical field is maintained between the two tips of the instrument.<sup><a href="#bib12">12</a></sup> With a monopolar ESU, the electrical field is created between the tip of the device and tissue, creating a larger gap for spark formation and an increased risk of fire.<sup><a href="#bib12">12</a></sup> Regardless of the type of ESU, however, the risk of fire exists whenever tissue and heat are involved.</p>
<p class="indent">Fires related to nonelectrocautery devices were less common than fires caused by ESUs.<sup><a href="#bib10">10</a></sup> A closed claim analysis by Mehta et al looked at claims regarding OR fires from the years 1985 to 2009 and showed that out of 103 OR fire claims, only 10 cases were related to non-ESU devices (nine related to lasers and one related to a defibrillator pad).</p>
<p class="indent">Typical sources of fuel are drapes, dressings, or gauzes, which may additionally have become soaked in alcohol-based prep solutions or petroleum jelly. These materials are usually under the control of the scrub and circulating nurses. Although dry materials such as sponges, paper gowns, and gauze intuitively seem to possess a higher fire fuel risk,<sup><a href="#bib12">12</a></sup> even wet pledgets present in a surgical airway may become combustible.<sup><a href="#bib13">13</a></sup> It is also important to note that most drapes used in an OR are actually designed to be water resistant. Thus, if they do serve as fire fuel, extinguishing the fire might be difficult as the entire drape would have to be submerged in water in order to effectively extinguish it.<sup><a href="#bib12">12</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Although alcohol-based prep solutions might be expected to be a common culprit in OR fires, less than a fifth (14%, <em>n</em>&#x00A0;=&#x00A0;11) of all ESU fires were related to alcohol-based prep solutions or volatile compounds.<sup><a href="#bib10">10</a></sup> Fires are more likely to be fueled by the burning of plastic airway equipment such as nasal cannulas with nose prongs and endotracheal tubes.<sup><a href="#bib10">10</a></sup> This remains true even when using reinforced endotracheal tubes, which are ET tubes that are considered laser safe, as they are wrapped in specialized metal. However, the tip of the tube is metal free and can easily serve as fuel if the laser crosses its path. Close to half of all airway fires occurred with ET tubes serving as a fuel source,<sup><a href="#bib12">12</a></sup> as ET cuff damage allows oxygen to come into the surgical field.<sup><a href="#bib13">13</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Closed airway systems, defined as systems that include an endotracheal or laryngeal mask airway are considered less of a fire source than open airway systems using a face mask or nasal cannula.<sup><a href="#bib12">12</a></sup> However, a fire risk still exists with closed breathing systems. Inadvertent cuff perforations can occur with reinforced endotracheal tubes; this can serve as strong fire accelerant as oxygen is introduced into the surgical field via the broken cuff.<sup><a href="#bib13">13</a></sup> ESU-related fires occurred more commonly during administration of monitored anesthesia care/regional anesthesia, where an open breathing circuit was used. Slightly more than half of these cases had supplemental oxygen delivered to the patient via nasal cannula, and a third were via face mask.<sup><a href="#bib10">10</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Oxygen is the most common oxidizer in OR fires,<sup><a href="#bib10">10</a></sup> with nitrous oxide a close second. These gases are usually under the control of the anesthesiology team and become an essential factor to control especially when an open<a id="page920"></a> breathing system is used. Mehta et al showed that 85% of OR fires were related to an open delivery system. Thus, maintaining the lower percentage of inspired oxygen (F<span class="usmall">IO</span><sub>2</sub>) while keeping the patient saturating becomes important. Even with closed airway systems, however, oxygen can spread into the OR environment via a break in the ET tube, the cuff, or the inspiratory/expiratory limbs of the system.</p>
<p class="indent">In a mechanical model looking at fire hazards during laser airway surgery, Roy et al showed that using 40% and 100% of F<span class="usmall">IO</span><sub>2</sub> created a long, sustained flame and immediate fire. Even at 29% F<span class="usmall">IO</span><sub>2</sub>, a small flame was noted. Use of room air did not cause a fire. Multiple sources recommend use of room air or an F<span class="usmall">IO</span><sub>2</sub> of less than 30% to avoid fires<sup><a href="#bib12">12</a></sup> and, if a greater percentage of oxygen is needed, to convert to a closed breathing system with an endotracheal tube. It is important to note that although titrating the oxygen down decreases the amount of oxygen delivered, there is often a lag between the delivered oxygen and the expired oxygen. Thus, although less oxygen is delivered, the patient might still be exhaling a high concentration of O<sub>2</sub>,<sup><a href="#bib12">12</a></sup> increasing fire risk. The anesthesiologist should not be lulled into a false sense of security even when delivering lower amounts of inspired oxygen.</p>
<p class="indent">Surgical drape tenting also creates an environment around the surgical field that might have a higher concentration of oxygen compared to the F<span class="usmall">IO</span><sub>2</sub> delivered to the patient, especially when open breathing systems are used. Although air in the OR is typically exchanged over 20 times, if a patient is draped so that oxygen becomes trapped between the patient and the site, the risk of fire would increase as that area would contain a higher concentration of oxygen.<sup><a href="#bib12">12</a></sup></p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Although modern inhaled anesthetics are considered nonexplosive or nonflammable, disastrous fires can still occur because both oxygen and nitrous oxide support combustion. Caution must be exercised when these gases come in contact with a source of ignition (eg, laser, ESU) and fuel (eg, paper drapes, prep solution, endotracheal tube).</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">While the anesthesiologist must always be aware of the potential risk of an intraoperative fire, some procedures present a clearly foreseeable risk.<sup><a href="#bib14">14</a></sup></p>
<ul class="u_bullb"><li><span>During a tracheostomy, the opening of the trachea can potentially release a high concentration of oxygen into the surgical field; this, combined with the presence of gauze and electrosurgical instruments, creates an imminent risk of fire.</span></li>
<li><span>The surgical site prep solution for procedures on the upper chest or neck (eg, port-a-cath placement) may tend to pool or accumulate within the folds of the surgical drapes, producing a potent fuel source. These procedures are commonly performed under monitored anesthesia care (MAC), and oxygen from the face mask can accumulate underneath the drapes. The use of an electrocautery device on the surgical side of the drape can then be sufficient to ignite the drapes over the patient&#x2019;s head. The sudden flash fire, combined with melting of the plastic of the face mask, can produce disfiguring head and facial burn injuries within only a few seconds.<sup><a href="#bib15">15</a></sup></span></li>
<li><span>Laser laryngoscopic surgery typically involves the use of laser surgical tools in close proximity to an airway that has been secured with an endotracheal tube. Appropriate &#x201C;laser-safe&#x201D; endotracheal tubes should be used during this type of surgery, but a risk of igniting the endotracheal tube itself is always present.<sup><a href="#bib13">13</a></sup> In the event of the endotracheal tube catching fire, the patient must be immediately extubated. Simultaneously, the endotracheal tube should be disconnected from the anesthesia circuit, the surgical field should be quenched with a sterile solution, and any remaining burning material must be removed from the airway. The primary goal is to terminate thermal injury in the shortest possible time. Once the airway fire is extinguished, the patient can be mask ventilated, the airway can be <a id="page921"></a>examined by laryngoscopy or bronchoscopy, and an airway can be secured with a new endotracheal tube.</span></li></ul>
<p class="indent">The OR environment contains ample equipment and materials to fulfill the three parts of the required triad for the outbreak of an OR fire. Unfortunately, because each part of the triad is under the control of a different nursing, surgical, or anesthesia team, deficiencies in team communication can easily lead to OR fires.</p>
<p class="BIBLIOGRAPHYpTitle">References</p>
<ol class="ref"><li id="bib1">Horowitz P, Hill W. <em>The Art of Electronics</em>. 2nd ed. Cambridge University Press; 1989:xxiii, 1125. Update to Horowitz 2015.</li>
<li id="bib2">Cadick J, Cadick J. <em>Electrical Safety Handbook</em>. 4th ed. McGraw-Hill; 2012.</li>
<li id="bib3">Chambers JJ, Saha AK. Electrocution during anaesthesia. <em>Anaesthesia</em>. 1979;34(2):173-175. PMID: 443513.</li>
<li id="bib4">Wills JH, Ehrenwerth J, Rogers D. Electrical injury to a nurse due to conductive fluid in an operating room designated as a dry location. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2010;110(6):1647-1649. PMID: 19933528.</li>
<li id="bib5">National Fire Protection Association (NFPA). <em>NFPA 99: Health Care Facilities Code</em>. National Fire Protection Association; 2018.</li>
<li id="bib6">Baas LS, Beery TA, Hickey CS. Care and safety of pacemaker electrodes in intensive care and telemetry nursing units. <em>Am J Crit Care</em>. 1997;6(4):302-311. PMID: 9215428.</li>
<li id="bib7">O&#x2019;Connor JL, Bloom DA. William T. Bovie and electrosurgery. <em>Surgery</em>. 1996;119(4):390-396. PMID: 8644002.</li>
<li id="bib8">Brill AI, Feste JR, Hamilton TL, et al. Patient safety during laparoscopic monopolar electrosurgery &#x2013; Principles and guidelines. Consortium on Electrosurgical Safety during Laparoscopy. <em>J Soc Laparoendosc Surg</em>. 1998;2(3):221-225. PMID: 9876743.</li>
<li id="bib9">Jones SB, Jones DB, Schwaitzberg S. Only you can prevent OR fires. <em>Ann Surg</em>. 2014;260(2):218-219. PMID: 25350649.</li>
<li id="bib10">Mehta SP, Bhananker SM, Posner KL, Domino KB. Operating room fires: a closed claims analysis. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2013;118(5):1133-1139. PMID: 23422795.</li>
<li id="bib11">Culp WC Jr, Kimbrough BA, Luna S, Maguddayao AJ. Mitigating operating room fires: development of a carbon dioxide fire prevention device. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2014;118(4):772-775. PMID: 24651231.</li>
<li id="bib12">Jones TS, Black IH, Robinson TN, Jones EL. Operating room fires. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2019;130(3):492-501. PMID: 30664060.</li>
<li id="bib13">Roy S, Smith LP. Surgical fires in laser laryngeal surgery: are we safe enough? <em>Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg</em>. 2015;152(1):67-72. PMID: 25344591.</li>
<li id="bib14">Kaye AD, Kolinsky D, Urman RD. Management of a fire in the operating room. <em>J Anesth</em>. 2014;28(2):279-287. PMID: 23989633.</li>
<li id="bib15">Culp WC Jr, Kimbrough BA, Luna S. Flammability of surgical drapes and materials in varying concentrations of oxygen. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2013;119(4):770-776. PMID: 23872933.</li></ol>
<a id="page922"></a><a id="page923"></a><a id="page924"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp44_1" onclick="openLinkInNewTab('https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/44_Wellness_Principles_and_Resources_for_Anesthesiologists/index.html');">Interactive Video Lecture 44. Wellness Principles and Resources for Anesthesiologists <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>