<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/jquery.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
<!--<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-1.10.2.min.js'></script>-->
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-migrate-1.2.1.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery.qtip.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/etext.js'></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec276">VI. ICU-Acquired Weakness</h4>
<p class="nonindent">ICU-acquired weakness (ICUAW) is an increasingly recognized entity that can greatly impede weaning from mechanical ventilation and lengthen the recovery process. It is thought to be due to three primary mechanisms: polyneuropathy, myopathy, and muscle atrophy. Critical illness polyneuropathy is a peripheral nerve disease manifested as symmetric sensory, motor, and autonomic nerve dysfunction. Patients demonstrate reduced compound motor action potentials (CMAPs) and sensory nerve action potentials (SNAPs) with histologic evidence of axonal degeneration late in the disease course. Direct muscle stimulation may demonstrate preserved CMAP amplitudes, indicating no myopathic component. Critical illness myopathy is instead characterized as muscle weakness with retained sensory nerve function. Electrophysiologic<a id="page892"></a> studies will demonstrate low-amplitude CMAPs with either direct muscle or nerve stimulation. Histologic studies show atrophy with muscle necrosis. These conditions likely overlap with each other and can present simultaneously. Proposed mechanisms for these conditions include acquired channelopathies, inexcitability of neuromuscular membranes, catabolic state leading to muscle wasting, atrophy from immobilization, and hyperglycemia-induced mitochondrial dysfunction.<sup><a href="#bib15">15</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">Identification of patients with ICUAW is challenging as nerve conduction studies are both resource and labor intensive and clinical diagnoses depends on the patient&#x2019;s ability to be alert and follow commands. The most consistent risk factor for development of ICUAW is severity of illness; however, other factors such as poor premorbid health and exposure to toxic therapies or conditions such as corticosteroids, aminoglycosides, neuromuscular blockers, immobilization, and hyperglycemia have also been implicated. Early mobilization of patients receiving mechanical ventilation has been shown to be safe and feasible and is associated with reduced ICU length of stay and increased functional scores at hospital discharge.<sup><a href="#bib16">16</a></sup></p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen751">Post&#x2013;Intensive Care Syndrome</h5>
<p class="nonindent">As ICU mortality decreases, survivors of critical illness are found to have ongoing cognitive and physical impairments that can continue for years. The term &#x201C;post&#x2013;intensive care syndrome&#x201D; (PICS) applies to both survivors of critical illness and their family and refers to their decline in physical, cognitive, and mental health after a patient is released from the intensive care unit. Up to 6 out of 10 survivors of critical illness have been found to have at least one PICS problem after 1&#x00A0;year follow-up,<sup><a href="#bib17">17</a></sup> with depression being associated with increased mortality in the first 2&#x00A0;years following ICU discharge.<sup><a href="#bib18">18</a></sup> No association for the development of PICS has been found for age, sex, disease severity, or ICU length of stay; however, higher premorbid frailty scores and fewer years of education were found to be independent predictors of PICS.<sup><a href="#bib17">17</a></sup> These findings point to the importance of understanding social determinants of health, and further research is needed to identify whether targeted therapies in the ICU can reduce the incidence of this syndrome.</p>
<p class="BIBLIOGRAPHYpTitle">References</p>
<ol class="ref"><li id="bib1">Wilcox ME, Chong CA, Niven DJ, et al. Do intensivist staffing patterns influence hospital mortality following ICU admission? A systematic review and meta-analyses. <em>Crit Care Med</em>. 2013;41:2253-2274.</li>
<li id="bib2">Lane D, Ferri M, Lemaire J, et al. A systematic review of evidence-informed practices for patient care rounds in the ICU. <em>Crit Care Med</em>. 2013;41:2015-2029.</li>
<li id="bib3">Hales BM, Pronovost PJ. The checklist&#x2014;a tool for error management and performance improvement. <em>J Crit Care</em>. 2006;21:231-235.</li>
<li id="bib4">Loeser JD, Treede RD. The kyoto protocol of IASP basic pain terminology. <em>Pain</em>. 2008;137(3):473-477.</li>
<li id="bib5">Devlin JW, Skrobik Y, G&#x00E9;linas C, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the prevention and management of pain, agitation/sedation, delirium, immobility, and sleep disruption in adult patients in the ICU. <em>Crit Care Med</em>. 2018;46(9):e825-e873.</li>
<li id="bib6"><a id="page893"></a>Ouellette DR, Patel S, Girard TD, et al. Liberation from mechanical ventilation in critically ill adults: an official American College of Chest Physicians/American Thoracic Society Clinical Practice Guideline. Inspiratory pressure augmentation during spontaneous breathing trials, protocols minimizing sedation, and noninvasive ventilation immediately after extubation. <em>Chest</em>. 2017;151(1):166-180.</li>
<li id="bib7">Guyatt GH, Akl EA, Crowther M, et al. Executive summary: antithrombotic therapy and prevention of thrombosis, 9th ed. American College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines. <em>Chest</em>. 2012;141:7S-47S.</li>
<li id="bib8">Taylor BE, McClave SA, Martindale RG, et al. Guidelines for the provision and assessment of nutrition support therapy in the adult critically ill patient: society of critical care medicine (SCCM) and American society for parenteral and enteral nutrition (A.S.P.E.N.). <em>Crit Care Med</em>. 2016;44(2):390-438.</li>
<li id="bib9">Kansagara D, Fu R, Freeman M, et al. Intensive insulin therapy in hospitalized patients: a systematic review. <em>Ann Intern Med</em>. 2011;154:268-282.</li>
<li id="bib10">Hebert PC, Wells G, Blajchman MA, et al. A multicenter, randomized, controlled clinical trial of transfusion requirements in critical care. Transfusion Requirements in Critical Care Investigators, Canadian Critical Care Trials Group. <em>N Engl J Med</em>. 1999;340:409-417.</li>
<li id="bib11">Force ADT, Ranieri VM, Rubenfeld GD, et al. Acute respiratory distress syndrome: the Berlin definition. <em>J Am Med Assoc</em>. 2012;307:2526-2533.</li>
<li id="bib12">Aoyama H, Uchida K, Aoyama K, et al. Assessment of therapeutic interventions and lung protective ventilation in patients with moderate to severe acute respiratory distress syndrome: a systematic review and network meta-analysis. <em>JAMA Netw Open</em>. 2019;2(7):e198116.</li>
<li id="bib13">Singer M, Deutschman CS, Seymour CW, et al. The third international consensus definitions for sepsis and septic shock (Sepsis-3). <em>J Am Med Assoc</em>. 2016;315(8):801-810.</li>
<li id="bib14">Rhodes A, Evans LE, Alhazzani W, et al. Surviving sepsis campaign. International guidelines for management of sepsis and septic shock: 2016. <em>Intensive Care Med</em>. 2017;43(3):304-377.</li>
<li id="bib15">Jolley SE, Bunnell AE, Hough CL. ICU-acquired weakness. <em>Chest</em>. 2016;150(5):1129-1140.</li>
<li id="bib16">Kress JP, Hall JB. ICU-acquired weakness and recovery from critical illness. <em>N Engl J Med</em>. 2014;370:1626-1635.</li>
<li id="bib17">Marra A, Pandharipande PP, Girard TD, et al. Co-occurrence of post-intensive care syndrome problems among 406 survivors of critical illness. <em>Crit Care Med</em>. 2018;46(9):1393-1401.</li>
<li id="bib18">Hatch R, Young D, Barber V, et al. Anxiety, depression and post traumatic stress disorder after critical illness: a UK-wide prospective cohort study. <em>Crit Care</em>. 2018;22(1):310.</li></ol>
<a id="page894"></a><a id="page895"></a><a id="page896"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp42_1" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_caf/42_Critical_Care/story.html'">Infographic 42.1 Extubation Criteria At a Glance <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<div class="link-me" id="grp42_2" onclick="window.location.href='https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/42_Anesthesia_for_Urologic_Surgery/index.html'">Interactive Video Lecture 42. Anesthesia for Urologic Surgery <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>