<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/jquery.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
<!--<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-1.10.2.min.js'></script>-->
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-migrate-1.2.1.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery.qtip.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/etext.js'></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec282">VI. Radical Cancer Surgery</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Radical surgical procedures are performed to treat prostate, bladder, or kidney cancer. Robotic surgeries are gaining popularity for radical cancer operations.<sup><a href="#bib7">7</a></sup> They are often lengthy procedures, requiring a steep<a id="page904"></a> Trendelenburg position to facilitate surgical access to the pelvis. As a result of this positioning, the lower extremities have decreased perfusion while the brain experiences increased mean arterial pressure and decreased venous drainage. Lung compliance and functional residual capacity are decreased, resulting in increased ventilation-perfusion mismatching. Pulmonary congestion and edema have been reported as have increased intracranial pressure and intraocular pressure. Other complications that result from the positioning include ischemic muscle damage in the lower extremities and pelvis and lower extremity and upper extremity nerve injuries. When the operative site in the pelvis is above the heart, the patient is at risk for venous air embolism. In addition to all of these concerns, radical cancer surgery poses a substantial risk for extensive blood loss and the need for transfusion.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Radical surgical procedures are associated with extensive blood loss, complications related to positioning, and venous air embolism.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen755">A. Radical Prostatectomy</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Prostate cancer is the second leading cause of male cancer-related deaths in the United States with surgery being the treatment of choice for localized prostate disease.<sup><a href="#bib7">7</a></sup> Radical prostatectomy can be performed by a perineal, retropubic, or laparoscopic surgical approach. During radical perineal or retropubic prostatectomy, general or regional (epidural or spinal) anesthesia may be used. If regional anesthesia is used, a sensory block of T6-8 is adequate. During the laparoscopic surgical approach, general anesthesia is the technique of choice for the reasons noted above (duration of surgery and steep Trendelenburg positioning). Robotic-assisted radical prostatectomy is associated with better visualization and better surgical dissection, decreased blood loss, less scaring and postoperative pain, shorter hospital stay, and faster return to daily activity.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">During radical procedures, the anesthesiologist should identify the chemotherapeutic agents used, be aware of the side effects of these drugs, and should be prepared for significant intraoperative hemorrhage.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen756">B. Radical Cystectomy</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Radical cystectomy involves en bloc removal of the bladder, prostate, seminal vesicles, and proximal urethra in men, while in women, it is necessary to remove the bladder, urethra, and anterior vaginal wall, as well as to perform a total hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. A pelvic lymph node dissection is also routinely included. At completion of the procedure, a urinary diversion is performed, most commonly as an ileal or colon conduit. Significant intraoperative hemorrhage can occur during radical cystectomy. The extent and duration of this surgery mandate general anesthesia. Patients with bladder cancer may have been treated with chemotherapy before their procedure. The anesthesiologist should be aware of prior use of any chemotherapeutic agent so any possible drug toxicity can be elucidated. In particular, doxorubicin has cardiotoxic effects, methotrexate may cause hepatic toxicity, and both cisplatin and methotrexate are associated with neurotoxicity and renal dysfunction.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">In 5% to 10% of right-sided renal cell carcinomas, the tumor extends into the renal vein, the inferior vena cava, and the right atrium, and thus, transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) is of crucial value.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen757">C. Radical Nephrectomy</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Radical or partial nephrectomy is the treatment of choice for renal cell carcinoma.<sup><a href="#bib8">8</a></sup> It involves en bloc removal of the kidney and surrounding fascia, the ipsilateral adrenal gland, and the upper ureter. In 5% to 10% of right-sided renal cell carcinomas, the tumor extends into the renal vein, the inferior vena cava, and the right atrium. To operate on these patients safely, the extent of the lesion must be defined preoperatively. If there is tumor extension into the vena cava or right atrium, cardiopulmonary bypass is often required to safely resect it.</p>
<a id="page905"></a>
<p class="indent">Transesophageal echocardiography may be of value in confirming complete removal of the tumor or identifying intraoperative embolization of the tumor and the need to emergently institute cardiopulmonary bypass. Nephrectomy may be performed through a lumbar, transabdominal, or thoracoabdominal incision. If a lumbar approach is used, the patient is placed in the flexed lateral decubitus position with the operative side up and the mechanical kidney support elevated beneath the 12th rib. This mechanical kidney support has been associated with hypotension due to decreased venous return, nerve damage, decreased thoracic compliance, and pulmonary atelectasis. General anesthesia is used because of positioning. Other complications of surgery include pneumothorax if the thoracic cavity is inadvertently entered or venous air embolism if the positioning places the operative site above the heart.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Hypotension during radical nephrectomy can be multifactorial; mechanical effect, pneumothorax, air embolism, and bleeding.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen758">D. Radical Surgery for Testicular Cancer</h5>
<p class="nonindent">All intratesticular masses are considered cancerous until proven otherwise. Radical orchiectomy is performed for both definitive diagnosis and as the initial step of most treatment regimens. Either regional or general anesthesia can be used for this procedure.</p>
<p class="indent">Again, the anesthesiologist should identify the chemotherapeutic agents used and be aware of the side effects of these drugs. One commonly used chemotherapeutic agent is bleomycin, an antitumor antibiotic used against germ cell tumors of the testis. Bleomycin use is associated with pulmonary toxicity and postoperative respiratory failure usually within 3 to 10&#x00A0;days after surgery. Risk factors for postoperative respiratory distress include preoperative evidence of pulmonary injury, recent exposure to bleomycin (within 1-2&#x00A0;months), a total dose of bleomycin &#x003E;450&#x00A0;mg, or a creatinine clearance of &#x003C;35&#x00A0;mL/min. A retrospective study found that intravenous fluid management, including blood transfusion, was the most significant factor affecting postoperative pulmonary morbidity and clinical outcomes. The authors recommend that intravenous fluid administration consist primarily of colloid and be limited to the minimum volume necessary to maintain hemodynamic stability and adequate renal output.</p>
<p class="BIBLIOGRAPHYpTitle">References</p>
<ol class="ref"><li id="bib1">DeGeorge KC, Holt HR, Hodges SC. Bladder cancer: diagnosis and treatment. <em>Am Fam Physician</em>. 2017;96(8):507-514. <a href="http://www.aafp.org/afp">www.aafp.org/afp</a>. PMID: 29094888.</li>
<li id="bib2">Lim KB. Epidemiology of clinical benign prostatic hyperplasia. <em>Asian J Urol</em>. 2017;4(3):148-151. PMID: 29264223.</li>
<li id="bib3">Jensen V. The TURP syndrome. <em>Can J Anaesth</em>. 1991;38(1):90-96. PMID: 1989745.</li>
<li id="bib4">Demirel I, Ozer AB, Bayar MK, Erhan OL. TURP syndrome and severe hyponatremia under general anaesthesia. <em>BMJ Case Rep</em>. 2012;2012:bcr-2012-006899. doi:10.1136/bcr-2012-006899. PMID: 23166168</li>
<li id="bib5">Strope SA, Yang L, Nepple KG, et al. Population based comparative effectiveness of transurethral resection of the prostate and laser therapy for benign prostatic hyperplasia. <em>J Urol</em>. 2012;187(4):1341-1345. PMID: 22341267.</li>
<li id="bib6">Knoll T, Alken P. Looking back at 50 years of stone therapy. <em>Aktuelle Urol</em>. 2019;50(2):157-165. doi:10.1055/a-0828-9936. PMID: 30818400.</li>
<li id="bib7">Mikhail D, Sarcona J, Mekhail M, Richstone L. Urologic robotic surgery. <em>Surg Clin North Am</em>. 2020;100(2):361-378. doi:10.1016/j.suc.2019.12.003. PMID: 32169184.</li>
<li id="bib8">Cohen HT, McGovern FJ. Renal-cell carcinoma. <em>N Engl J Med</em>. 2005;353(23):2477-2490. PMID: 16339096.</li></ol>
<div class="link-me" id="grp43_1" onclick="openLinkInNewTab('https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/43_Electrical_Safety_and_Fire/index.html');">Interactive Video Lecture 43. Electrical Safety and Fire <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>