<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec272">II. Ventilator Liberation and Spontaneous Breathing Trials</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Liberation (sometimes called weaning) from mechanical ventilation is a process that requires, at a minimum, adequate oxygenation and ventilation without mechanical assistance. However, safe removal of the endotracheal tube requires patients to meet additional criteria including the ability to manage secretions and protect their airway from aspiration and obstruction.</p>
<p class="indent">Both objective and subjective parameters should be examined in order to determine a patient&#x2019;s suitability for liberation from mechanical ventilation. <strong><a href="#tt42-2">Table 42.2</a></strong> lists commonly used criteria for extubation. The objective criteria require the patient to undergo a <strong><em>spontaneous breathing trial (SBT)</em></strong>. The SBT is a 30- to 120-minute trial of breathing with little or no assistance from the ventilator. It may be performed with a variety of techniques including T-piece trials, pressure support ventilation trials, and continuous positive airway pressure trials. No single technique is superior to another, though pressure augmentation of 5 to 8&#x00A0;cm&#x00A0;H<sub>2</sub>O during the SBT is recommended for patients ventilated more than 24 hours.<sup><a href="ch042-sec06.xhtml#bib6">6</a></sup> An SBT should be performed daily on all patients who qualify. Typically this includes mechanically ventilated patients requiring &#x003C;60% fraction of inspired oxygen (F<span class="usmall">IO</span><sub>2</sub>) and positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP)&#x00A0;&#x003C;&#x00A0;8&#x00A0;cm&#x00A0;H<sub>2</sub>O. When combined with a protocolized daily SAT, the daily SBT has been shown to shorten the duration of mechanical ventilation and may improve mortality.</p>
<a id="page881"></a>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt42-2"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;42.2</span> Criteria for Extubation</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<tr>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Subjective Criteria</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Indication for intubation is resolved</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Adequate airway reflexes to handle secretions and avoid upper airway obstruction</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;No signs of increased work of breathing (eg, nasal flairing, accessory muscle use, sternal retractions, diaphoresis)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Objective Criteria</strong> (based on spontaneous breathing trial performance)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Hemodynamic stability: Heart rate and blood pressure change &#x003C;20% from baseline</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Adequate oxygenation: Sa<span class="usmall">O</span><sub>2</sub> &#x003E; 90%, Pa<span class="usmall">O</span><sub>2</sub> &#x003E; 60&#x00A0;mm Hg, Pa<span class="usmall">O</span><sub>2</sub>/F<span class="usmall">IO</span><sub>2</sub> &#x003E; 150</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;PEEP &#x003C; 8&#x00A0;cm&#x00A0;H<sub>2</sub>O and F<span class="usmall">IO</span><sub>2</sub> &#x003C; 0.5</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Adequate ventilation: Pa<span class="usmall">CO</span><sub>2</sub> &#x003C; 60&#x00A0;mm Hg, pH&#x00A0;&#x003E;&#x00A0;7.25</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Rapid shallow breathing index (RR/Vt)&#x00A0;&#x003C;&#x00A0;105</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Negative inspiratory force &#x003E;30&#x00A0;cm&#x00A0;H<sub>2</sub>O</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Vital capacity &#x003E;10&#x00A0;mL/kg</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">F<span class="usmall">IO</span><sub>2</sub>, fraction of inspired oxygen; Pa<span class="usmall">CO</span><sub>2</sub>, arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide; Pa<span class="usmall">O</span><sub>2</sub>, arterial partial pressure of oxygen; PEEP, positive end-expiratory pressure; RR/Vt, respiratory rate/tidal volume; Sa<span class="usmall">O</span><sub>2</sub>, arterial oxygen saturation.</p>
<p class="u_tfoot">These criteria are only guidelines. Decisions regarding extubation should be made on an individual basis.</p>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>