<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec263">XIII. Postoperative Acid/Base Disturbances</h4>
<p class="nonindent">ABG samples are frequently sent for analysis on unstable patients in the PACU. The information provided can help elucidate the etiology and severity of physiologic perturbations. The most common acid-base disorder postoperatively is acute respiratory acidosis due to the respiratory depressant effects of residual anesthetic and analgesic medications. It is present when the pH is &#x003C;7.4 with a Pa<span class="usmall">CO</span><sub>2</sub> &#x003E;&#x00A0;40&#x00A0;mm Hg. Symptoms can include headache, confusion, agitation, and somnolence. Severe acidosis is present with a pH of &#x003C;7.25, and consideration should be given to reintubation to reestablish appropriate ventilation. As a ballpark figure, each increase in Pa<span class="usmall">CO</span><sub>2</sub> of 10&#x00A0;mm Hg acutely should lead to a 0.08 decrease in pH. <a id="page847"></a>If the pH is higher than would be estimated by the rise in Pa<span class="usmall">CO</span><sub>2</sub>, there is likely a chronic component of respiratory acidosis. If the pH is lower than would be estimated, then a metabolic acidosis is also present.</p>
<p class="indent">Metabolic acidosis can be classified into gap or nongap depending on whether an anion gap is present. The most likely cause of a postoperative nongap metabolic acidosis may be excessive chloride administration in normal saline, but may also result from loss of bicarbonate in the urine from renal tubular acidosis or the GI tract such as with a high-output fistula. When an anion gap is present, it suggests that the body is producing too much acid or the kidneys have a reduced ability to excrete acid. The most common causes postoperatively include lactic acidosis from decreased tissue perfusion, diabetic ketoacidosis, starvation ketoacidosis, and uremia from renal failure. If the pH is &#x003C;7.2, sodium bicarbonate administration may be required to increase the pH enough for vasopressors to work and to prevent electrolyte disturbances such as hyperkalemia. However, the definitive management for metabolic acidosis with an anion gap is to treat the cause by restoring circulation, administering insulin or dextrose, or initiating renal replacement therapy.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>