<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec281">V. Urologic Laparoscopy</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Urologic laparoscopy procedures have gained wide acceptance because they are minimally invasive, more surgically precise, and provide better preservation of periprostatic vascular, muscular, and neural structures. They are also less painful postoperatively and less costly than open surgical procedures. Laparoscopic procedures performed in urology include diagnostic procedures for evaluating undescended testis, orchiopexy, varicocelectomy, bladder suspension, pelvic lymphadenectomy, nephrectomy, adrenalectomy, prostatectomy, and cystectomy. Many structures in the genitourinary system are extraperitoneal (ie, pelvic lymph nodes, bladder, ureters, adrenal glands, kidneys), and urologists use extraperitoneal insufflation during laparoscopic surgery on these organs. CO<sub>2</sub> absorption is greater with extraperitoneal compared with intraperitoneal insufflation. Therefore, general anesthesia with controlled ventilation is the method of choice to maintain normocarbia. Extraperitoneal insufflation results in subcutaneous emphysema that may extend all the way up to the head and neck. Please refer to <a href="ch027.xhtml">Chapter 27</a> for a detailed discussion of the physiologic impact and potential complications of laparoscopy.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>