<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec261">XI. Fluid Management</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Perioperative fluid management depends largely on patient and surgical specifics. It is also a central component of ERAS pathways that affects anesthetic management both intraoperatively and in the immediate postoperative period.<sup><a href="ch040-sec16.xhtml#bib11">11</a></sup> While pathway specifics may vary depending on patient characteristics, type of surgery, and institutional preference, the goal of fluid management is always to maintain euvolemia. This may involve a zero-balance fluid regimen (also called a restrictive approach) for some low-risk surgeries in low-risk patients or goal-directed fluid therapy in more extensive surgeries and for higher risk patients. In either case, it is important for the PACU physician to be aware of patients that are on ERAS pathways and to adhere to the fluid management goals specific to these patients, as studies have demonstrated that fluid management on the day of surgery is an independent predictor of postoperative complications. Many patients will be transitioned to early enteral feeding and have maintenance IV fluids discontinued in PACU. Other patients will be continued on restrictive maintenance IV fluids and may need titrated boluses for oliguria or hypotension. Some ERAS protocols emphasize volume resuscitation with colloid over crystalloid solutions in order to maximize intravascular volume while minimizing overall volume administration. While some studies suggest that this approach does lead to less volume administered, data showing improved clinical outcomes are inconsistent, and there is not currently a strong consensus favoring one type of fluid over another.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">ERAS fluid management aims to maintain euvolemia throughout the perioperative period and may involve a zero-balance or goal-directed fluid therapy approach.</p>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>