<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec291">III. Considerations for the Physician</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen769">A. The Impaired Physician</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The current body of literature relating to physician impairment, with few exceptions, focuses on impairment from substance use disorders. However, it must be noted that factors other than substance use may impair professional performance. These include other forms of addiction (eg, gambling, sex, food), psychiatric conditions (eg, anxiety, depression, obsessive-compulsive disorder), and medical conditions or treatments leading to fatigue or altered mental status (eg, obstructive sleep apnea, seizure disorder, prescribed narcotics).</p>
<p class="indent">Anesthesiologists have, for years, been considered at high risk for <strong><em>substance use disorder (SUD)</em></strong>. However, until recently, strong data did not exist to support this assertion or its consequences. In 2013, Warner et al reported on the prevalence of SUD in those entering accredited anesthesiology residencies between 1975 and 2009.<sup><a href="ch045-sec06.xhtml#bib5">5</a></sup> Although their primary objective was to define the <strong><em>incidence</em></strong> of SUD during training, they also reported on the types of substances abused, episodes of relapse, and consequences, including death attributed to SUD. The most commonly abused substances were opioids, with intravenous fentanyl being the most common. Other commonly abused substances were alcohol, anesthetics or hypnotics, marijuana, and cocaine, with many abusing multiple substances. In a follow-up study, Warner et al reported the percentage of anesthesiologists expected to develop SUD within 30&#x00A0;years after completion of training was 1.6%. The most common substances used were opioids (55%), alcohol (40%), and anesthetics/hypnotics (20%). A substantial proportion of anesthesiologists who develop SUD after the completion of training die of this condition, and the risk of relapse is high in those who survive.<sup><a href="ch045-sec06.xhtml#bib6">6</a></sup></p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">For anesthesiologists who developed a substance use disorder (SUD) during their training, the subsequent risk of death from relapse and SUD-related causes is reported to be 11%&#x2014;an occupational hazard rate higher than being a firefighter and only slightly lower than being a police officer.</p>
</div>
<a id="page930"></a>
<p class="indent">In response to the growing requirements by the Joint Commission, most states now offer specialized support programs for physicians struggling with SUD. These programs vary in their relationship with their respective state medical boards. Anesthesiologists can easily find a local program by doing an online search for &#x201C;physician health program&#x201D; in their state. Alternatively, one can simply visit the Federation of State Physician Health Programs (<a href="http://www.fsphp.org">http://www.fsphp.org</a>) and select the appropriate state or access aggregated information links via the American Society of Anesthesiologists Wellness website (<a href="https://www.asahq.org/in-the-spotlight/wellness-resources">https://www.asahq.org/in-the-spotlight/wellness-resources</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen770">B. The Aging Physician</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Since 1975, the number of practicing physicians older than 65&#x00A0;years in the United States has increased by more than 374%, and in 2015, 23% of practicing physicians were 65&#x00A0;years or older. With time, physicians gain experience; attain knowledge, judgment, and wisdom; and advance within the field, passing skills on to trainees and shaping the practice environment. While research shows that between the ages of 40 and 75&#x00A0;years the mean cognitive ability declines by more than 20%, there is substantial variability from one person to another, indicating that while some older physicians are profoundly impaired, others retain their ability and skills. There is no set retirement age for physicians, and this question is arising more frequently as many physicians choose to delay retirement in uncertain economic times. In November 2015, the American Medical Association (AMA) Council on Medical Education issued a report on &#x201C;Competency and the Aging Physician&#x201D; that called for &#x201C;guidelines/standards for monitoring and assessing both their own and their colleagues&#x2019; competency,&#x201D; and in 2016, the American College of Surgeons (ACS) released a &#x201C;statement on the aging surgeon.&#x201D; Both the AMA and ACS proposals rely on voluntary action by physicians.<sup><a href="ch045-sec06.xhtml#bib7">7</a></sup> In 2012, relatively few departments had specific policies for older anesthesiologists. With the publication of findings that same year that found a higher frequency of litigation and a greater severity of injury in patients treated by anesthesiologists in the 65 years and older group,<sup><a href="ch045-sec06.xhtml#bib8">8</a></sup> promulgation of further research as well as proposals for neurocognitive and competency testing are evolving in both specialty societies and among regulatory agencies. More frequent ongoing professional performance evaluations have been recommended by the Joint Commission to address competency. As institutions implement such evaluations, they will hopefully become more valid and sensitive to instances of true cognitive decline.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>