<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec275">V. Acute Lung Injury and Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) occurs commonly in the ICU. It is characterized by the acute onset of hypoxemic respiratory failure, diffuse alveolar damage, noncardiogenic edema, reduced thoracic compliance, and both increased dead space and shunt. ARDS can occur as a result of direct injury to the lung (eg, aspiration or pneumonia) or in association with extrapulmonary infection (eg, sepsis), injury (eg, multiple trauma or burns), or toxicity from other therapies (eg, transfusion-related acute lung injury or hematopoietic stem cell transplantation).</p>
<p class="indent">The definition of ARDS has changed over time. In 2012, a new consensus conference proposed the Berlin definition, which eliminates the distinction between acute lung injury and ARDS, and instead categorizes ARDS as mild, moderate, or severe based on the degree of hypoxemia.<sup><a href="ch042-sec06.xhtml#bib11">11</a></sup> The classification system is summarized in <strong><a href="#tt42-6">Table 42.6</a></strong>.</p>
<p class="indent">Although ARDS appears to be a diffuse process by chest x-ray, computed tomography imaging and histopathologic specimens demonstrate heterogeneity with severely damaged areas of lung existing next to normal appearing areas. Treatment of ARDS is largely supportive and consists mainly of attempting to preserve the uninjured lung while treating the underlying cause of ARDS.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen748">A. Lung-Protective Ventilation</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Lung-protective ventilation (LPV) describes a mechanical ventilation strategy that restricts tidal volumes (Vt) to &#x2264;6&#x00A0;mL/kg and targets a static (plateau) airway pressure of &#x2264;30&#x00A0;cm&#x00A0;H<sub>2</sub>O. Because minute ventilation can be maintained by increasing the respiratory rate only so far, it is commonly inadequate to eliminate all carbon dioxide that is produced. This results in a state of hypercapnea and respiratory acidosis called <strong><em>permissive hypercapnea.</em></strong> LPV is the only intervention that has been shown to significantly reduce mortality in patients with ARDS compared with conventional ventilator strategies that rely on Vt&#x00A0;&#x003E;&#x00A0;6&#x00A0;mL/kg.</p>
<p class="indent">LPV strategies would result in substantial atelectasis and increased shunt if a reduction in Vt were the only intervention. In order to maintain a<a id="page889"></a> nonatelectatic and open lung, low Vt is typically bundled with higher levels of PEEP. The optimal balance between PEEP and F<span class="usmall">IO</span><sub>2</sub> continues to be debated. Alternative approaches to <strong><em>open lung ventilation</em></strong> include the use of intermittent high-level end-expiratory pressure or sigh breaths, pressure-controlled ventilation, inverse ratio ventilation (prolonged inspiratory time), prone positioning, and high-frequency ventilation, which have all been used successfully.</p>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt42-6"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;42.6</span> The Berlin Definition of the Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:30%;"></col>
<col style="width:70%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Timing</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Within 1&#x00A0;wk of a known clinical insult or new or worsening respiratory symptoms</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Chest imaging<sup>a</sup></p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Bilateral opacities not fully explained by effusions, lobar/lung collapse, or nodules</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Origin of edema</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Not fully explained by cardiac failure or fluid overload. Need objective assessment (eg, echocardiography) if no risk factor present</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3" colspan="2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Oxygenation</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Mild:</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">200&#x00A0;mm Hg&#x00A0;&#x003C;&#x00A0;Pa<span class="usmall">O</span><sub>2</sub>/F<span class="usmall">IO</span><sub>2</sub> &#x2264; 300&#x00A0;mm Hg; PEEP or CPAP &#x2265; 5&#x00A0;cm&#x00A0;H<sub>2</sub>O</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">Moderate:</p></td>
<td class="td3">
<p class="tbodyleft">100&#x00A0;mm Hg&#x00A0;&#x003C;&#x00A0;Pa<span class="usmall">O</span><sub>2</sub>/F<span class="usmall">IO</span><sub>2</sub> &#x2264; 200&#x00A0;mm Hg; PEEP &#x2265; 5&#x00A0;cm&#x00A0;H<sub>2</sub>O</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Severe:</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Pa<span class="usmall">O</span><sub>2</sub>/F<span class="usmall">IO</span><sub>2</sub> &#x2264; 100&#x00A0;mm Hg with PEEP &#x2265; 5&#x00A0;cm&#x00A0;H<sub>2</sub>O</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">CPAP, continuous positive airway pressure; F<span class="usmall">IO</span><sub>2</sub>, fraction of inspired oxygen; Pa<span class="usmall">O</span><sub>2</sub>, arterial partial pressure of oxygen; PEEP, positive end-expiratory pressure.</p>
<p class="u_tfoot"><sup>a</sup> Chest radiography or computed tomography scan.</p>
<p class="u_tfoot">Adapted from Force ADT, Ranieri VM, Rubenfeld GD, et al. Acute respiratory distress syndrome: The Berlin definition. <em>J Am Med Assoc</em>. 2012;307:2526-2533.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen749">B. Rescue Techniques</h5>
<p class="nonindent">In instances when oxygenation is severely impaired, prone positioning, inhaled vasodilators, neuromuscular blockade, and extracorporeal life support (also known as extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, or ECMO) may be used. Of these techniques, prone positioning and venovenous ECMO have shown mortality benefit in moderate to severe ARDS.<sup><a href="ch042-sec06.xhtml#bib12">12</a></sup> Inhaled nitric oxide and inhaled prostacyclins variably and transiently improve oxygenation in ARDS by improving blood flow to ventilated alveoli, but they do not have a proven mortality benefit. Neuromuscular blocking drugs have also not been shown to reliably improve outcomes. Other therapies for ARDS that do not have strong evidence in support of their efficacy include inhaled beta-agonists, albumin infusions, and systemic steroids.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen750">C. Sepsis and Septic Shock</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The physiologic response to systemic infections known as sepsis can manifest in varying degrees of severity, and efforts to define this condition have evolved greatly over the years. Earlier definitions, such as the systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) criteria, focused primarily on vital sign and laboratory abnormalities that were nonspecific for sepsis and have since been abandoned. In 2016, a joint task force at the 45th Critical Care Congress changed the definition of sepsis to &#x201C;life-threatening organ dysfunction caused by a dysregulated host response to infection.<sup><a href="ch042-sec06.xhtml#bib13">13</a></sup>&#x201D; Septic shock is a severe form of sepsis that results in a distributive shock and is characterized by low systemic <a id="page890"></a>vascular resistance, hypotension, and regional blood flow redistribution, resulting in tissue hypoperfusion and increased mortality compared to sepsis alone. Because survival from sepsis depends heavily on early intervention, the most recent guidelines recommend hospitals implement sepsis screening programs to facilitate prompt recognition of this disease.<sup><a href="ch042-sec06.xhtml#bib14">14</a></sup></p>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt42-7"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;42.7</span> Management of Severe Sepsis and Septic Shock</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<tr>
<td class="td3">
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Early recognition of sepsis or septic shock</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Obtain cultures prior to starting antibiotics, but do not delay antibiotics</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Administer empiric, broad-spectrum antibiotics within 1 h of diagnosis</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Control the source of infection if appropriate (ie, surgical intervention if appropriate)</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Initial resuscitation of at least 30&#x00A0;mL/kg with crystalloid fluids for sepsis-induced hypoperfusion</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Use norepinephrine as the first-line vasopressor for a target mean arterial pressure of &#x2265;65&#x00A0;mm Hg</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Consider adding vasopressin as an adjunct to catecholamines</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Consider dobutamine if hypoperfusion persists despite fluid resuscitation and vasopressor support</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Consider stress-dose steroid therapy if blood pressure is poorly responsive to fluid and vasopressors</p>
<p class="U_TbBL1"><span class="u_blue">&#x2022;</span>&#x00A0;&#x00A0;Target a hemoglobin of &#x2265;7&#x00A0;g/dL in the absence of myocardial ischemia, severe hypoxemia, or acute hemorrhage</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">Adapted from Rhodes A, Evans LE, Alhazzani W, et al. Surviving sepsis campaign. International guidelines for management of sepsis and septic shock: 2016. <em>Intensive Care Med</em>. 2017;43(3):304-377.</p>
</div>
<p class="video"><video data-id="8tQFs7dM" controls="controls" class="jwp-video" crossorigin="anonymous" style="width:100%; height:auto; width:320px; height:240px;">Browser issues</video></p>
<p class="video1" id="vid42-1"><strong>VIDEO 42.1</strong></p>
<p class="video2"><strong>Sepsis</strong></p>
<p class="indent">Clinical management of sepsis is summarized in <strong><a href="#tt42-7">Table 42.7</a></strong>. The mainstay of early treatment is prompt and appropriate antibiotic administration, intravascular fluid resuscitation using crystalloids, vasopressors if hypotension persists after adequate fluid resuscitation, and inotropes if low cardiac output is suspected.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Fluid Resuscitation</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Sepsis commonly causes a state of systemic vasodilation that results in a low effective circulating volume. Restoration of an effective circulating volume may be achieved by increasing absolute intravascular volume with fluid resuscitation or by increasing vascular tone with vasopressors. A wide variety of fluids including blood products, albumin, synthetic colloid solutions, and many different crystalloid solutions have been extensively studied (see <a href="ch023.xhtml">Chapter 23</a>). Albumin has generally proven no more effective than crystalloid solutions, and synthetic colloids are associated with increased harm. Older guidelines have advocated that red blood cell transfusion be used as a way to increase oxygen delivery, but newer data suggest that targeting a Hb of 7&#x00A0;g/dL, the same as in most critically ill patients, is appropriate. <strong><em>Crystalloids remain the preferred resuscitation fluid in most septic patients</em></strong>.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Vasopressors</h6>
<p class="nonindent">A number of vasopressors, including phenylephrine, norepinephrine, epinephrine, dopamine, and vasopressin, have been evaluated for systemic vascular resistance augmentation in sepsis. Norepinephrine is the recommended first-line agent owing to evidence of improved outcomes and reduced side effects. <a id="page891"></a>Epinephrine may be considered an alternative agent, but it is associated with increased arrhythmias. There is evidence that endogenous vasopressin production is suppressed in sepsis, and this provides the theoretical basis for considering the addition of vasopressin to norepinephrine. However, this has not been shown to improve outcomes. Dopamine and phenylephrine are generally not recommended.</p>
<p class="headd"><em><strong>Did You Know?</strong></em></p>
<div class="boxd">
<p class="dify">Of the various vasopressors used to augment systemic vascular resistance in the setting of septic shock, norepinephrine is the first-line agent owing to evidence of improved outcomes and reduced side effects.</p>
</div>
<h6 class="h6">Inotropes</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Myocardial depression is a common phenomenon in patients with septic shock and may result in inadequate cardiac output and oxygen delivery. Once adequate intravascular volume and systemic vascular resistance have been achieved by the administration of fluid therapy and vasopressors, dobutamine or epinephrine may be used to augment cardiac output. Because pulmonary artery catheters are no longer recommended for the routine management of septic patients, central venous oxyhemoglobin saturation of &#x2265;70% or serum lactate clearance may be used as a surrogate marker for adequate cardiac output and oxygen delivery. This may help guide decisions about the addition of inotropes. Both agents may precipitate arrhythmias.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Antibiotics</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Identifying the source of the infection, attaining source control, and initiating appropriate antibiotic therapy early are at least as important as providing hemodynamic support in sepsis. Appropriate cultures should always be obtained before antimicrobial therapy is initiated and may include blood, sputum, urine, cerebrospinal fluid, and wounds and other fluid cultures (eg, pleural fluid or ascites). Empiric antibiotic therapy should be started within 1 hour of recognition of sepsis (see <strong><a href="ch042-sec04.xhtml#tt42-4">Table 42.4</a></strong> for antibiotic recommendations). After antibiotic susceptibility testing is available, narrowing the spectrum of antimicrobial treatment is appropriate.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Corticosteroids</h6>
<p class="nonindent">The use of stress-dose steroids (eg, hydrocortisone 200-300&#x00A0;mg/d) in sepsis is controversial. Current guidelines recommend they be considered as an adjunct in patients with septic shock who remain hypotensive despite adequate volume resuscitation and vasopressor therapy. Cosyntropin stimulation testing prior to steroid initiation is not recommended. Steroids may also be considered in patients with recent steroid use.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>