<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec269">III. Quality Improvement and Patient Safety</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen732">A. Structure, Process, and Outcome: The Building Blocks of Safety</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The Donabedian model<sup><a href="ch041-sec04.xhtml#bib13">13</a></sup> is a conceptual framework for evaluating quality and designing quality of care improvements using three categories of analysis: structure, process, and outcome. The term &#x201C;structure&#x201D; describes the factors which impact the context in which care occurs (such as the hospital, staff, training, equipment, and administration); &#x201C;process&#x201D; relates to the normative behaviors, relationships, and interactions (such as preventive care, patient education, choice of diagnostic or therapeutic interventions) throughout healthcare delivery; and finally, &#x201C;outcome&#x201D; refers to the results obtained and the effect of healthcare encounters on patients or populations (mortality, health status, patient satisfaction, or health-related quality of life). The Donabedian framework can be used to modify structures and processes within a healthcare delivery unit and to evaluate the effects of changes on specified external indicators of quality; however, the model itself does not contain an implicit definition of quality or value. Lohr has defined &#x201C;quality healthcare&#x201D; to be &#x201C;the degree to which health services for individuals and populations increase the likelihood of desired health outcomes and are consistent with current professional knowledge.&#x201D;<sup><a href="ch041-sec04.xhtml#bib14">14</a></sup></p>
<p class="indent">The Donabedian model is relevant to discussions of patient safety and quality of care for two reasons: (1) patient safety is related to structure and process, and quality describes outcomes and the manner in which they are achieved; (2) legislators, regulators, healthcare administrators, and payors uniformly require and rely upon this framework. The model describes how regulators, policymakers, and stakeholders analyze the healthcare system and therefore every health system&#x2019;s licensure, regulatory compliance, and condition of participation requirements. It is commonly believed that the majority of medical errors result from faulty systems and processes.</p>
<p class="indent">Deming developed the <strong><em>Total Quality Management</em></strong> (TQM) model which promoted an organizational approach to quality which stressed the importance of teamwork, defined processes, systems thinking, and change programs intended to create an environment supportive of quality improvement. In a similar fashion, <strong><em>Continuous Quality Improvement</em></strong> (CQI) is a doctrine based in the principle that a potential opportunity exists for improvement in every process, and therefore, objective data are necessary to analyze and improve processes. The &#x201C;<strong><em>PDSA cycle</em></strong>&#x201D; implements four steps (1) a &#x201C;Plan&#x201D; for a change, (2) a &#x201C;Do&#x201D; action which carries out that plan, (3) a &#x201C;Study&#x201D; of the results, and (4) an &#x201C;Act&#x201D; or lasting quality improvement initiative. The <strong><em>Six Sigma</em></strong> model consists of 5 elements (define, measure, analyze, improve, and control) which represent a quality improvement framework for developing incremental improvement. <strong><em>Root cause analysis</em></strong> (RCA) is a retrospective rather than prospective model of quality improvement. RCA is a widely used two-step process&#x2014;thorough examination of adverse outcomes (eg, interviews, document review) and development of plans to strengthen or develop safety systems.</p>
<a id="page867"></a>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen733">B. Difficulty of Outcome Measurement in Anesthesia</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Quality of care is difficult if not impossible to define and measure clinically. The first clinical quality indicators, or <strong><em>generic quality screens</em></strong>, relied on the identification of specific adverse outcomes and subsequent analysis through individual case review to identify potential quality of care issues. Subsequently, The Joint Commission developed a series of anesthesia-related quality indicators by which organizational performance could be continuously monitored and evaluated. This national <strong><em>Indicator Measurement System</em></strong> evaluated two categories of performance: (1) sentinel event indicators (unexpected occurrences involving death or serious physical injury) and (2) rate-based indicators (trends in a particular type of process or outcome of care). Unfortunately, the validation of anesthetic clinical indicators is largely limited to expert opinion, because at this time, there is insufficient evidence to demonstrate that compliance with evidence-based best practice will systematically and universally result in better patient outcome.<sup><a href="ch041-sec04.xhtml#bib15">15</a></sup> For example, compliance with perioperative beta-blockade was initially instituted as a national quality indicator after data suggested that institution of perioperative beta-blockade reduced the incidence of myocardial infarction in high-risk patients undergoing noncardiac surgery. Subsequently, additional data validated the effect of beta-blockade on myocardial infarction rate, but also demonstrated that the risk of death and blindness were increased in noncardiac surgery patients receiving perioperative beta-blockade.</p>
<p class="indent">Outcome measurement in anesthesiology is also complicated by the lack of standardized and consensus definitions across systems and countries. For example, perioperative anesthesia-related mortality can be measured by three different indicators: death within 48 hours of a procedure involving anesthesia, death rate associated with procedures involving anesthesia, or deaths within 30&#x00A0;days of surgery. Death as an outcome measure, similar to other perioperative morbidity measures, is dependent on the patient&#x2019;s medical status or severity of illness; institutionally the cumulative medical complexity of patients is reflected in the case-mix index. Although the <strong><em>ASA Physical Status Classification System</em></strong> is related to perioperative risk, the system is largely subjective and definitions are based on relative severity of disease which result in inconsistent categorization. The complexity of clinical care systems is such that multiple variables are involved in every outcome. Thus, anesthesia-specific outcomes, or outcomes specifically attributable to anesthesia care, remain elusive. It is difficult to attribute causality for the outcome to either a specific surgical, anesthetic, or medical intervention as opposed to the totality of the medical care. The ability of the anesthesiologist in a brief perioperative timeframe to optimize the patient before surgery and to follow the outcomes postoperatively is limited. In addition, it is not possible to accurately predict which of many common but low-morbidity anesthesia outcomes are of highest importance to a particular surgical patient. For example, the specific choice of opiate for the management of postoperative pain may impair the perceived quality of care for a postoperative patient who considers nausea more important than the intensity of pain.</p>
<p class="indent">Thus, with respect to the Donabedian model, practical quality improvements based on connections between process and outcomes requires large sample populations, adjustments by case mix, and long-term follow-up; and the meaningful impact of specific interventions on relatively low-frequency adverse outcomes is largely lost in the complexity of the individual patient and multiple healthcare interventions.</p>
<a id="page868"></a>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen734">C. Regulatory Requirements for Quality Improvement</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The Flexner Report established standards for modern medical education and provided an impetus for the development of state departments of public health which were later charged with the supervision of healthcare institutions. In the 1950s, The Joint Commission on Accreditation of Hospitals (JCAH), now referred to simply as The Joint Commission, established an accreditation process for hospitals which became a compulsory standard for facilities seeking state licensure and Medicare participation.</p>
<p class="indent">State licensure is a statutory condition of participation for hospitals, while accreditation is a voluntary means of meeting the conditions for participation. Regulatory oversight for healthcare quality occurs at many levels ranging from professional licensure; conditions of participation; training, certification, and accreditation; mandatory reporting; and pay for performance. Compliance with regulatory mandates has made healthcare the most regulated of industries in the United States.</p>
<p class="indent">The Federal Health Reform legislation of 2010, the Affordable Care Act (ACA), mandates &#x201C;value-based purchasing&#x201D; and assigns bonuses or penalties to providers and hospitals which employ care coordination and safety interventions, which prevent nosocomial infections and unnecessary hospital readmissions, and participate in public reporting of hospital and provider quality performance. Curve-2 Metrics or &#x201C;Metrics for the Second Curve of Health Care&#x201D; refers to the transition from the volume-based first curve to the value-based second curve and requires (1) the alignment of hospitals, providers, and other clinical providers across the continuum of care; (2) the adoption of evidence-based practices to improve quality and patient safety; (3) the improvement of efficiency through productivity and financial management; and (4) the development of integrated information systems. Elements of Curve-2 Metrics applicable to anesthesiologists will include measures such as the effective management and measurement of care transitions, the management of utilization variation, the reduction of preventable complications and mortality, and expense per episode of care.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>