<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec257">VII. Hypoventilation</h4>
<p class="nonindent">While hypoxia is easily recognized on PACU monitors, hypoventilation frequently goes unrecognized and, as mentioned above, may be masked by the routine administration of supplemental O<sub>2</sub> given to postoperative patients.</p>
<a id="page842"></a>
<div class="table">
<p class="TABLEpNUM" id="tt40-4"><strong><span class="tab">Table&#160;40.4</span> Postoperative Risk Stratification for Patients With OSA</strong></p>
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:33%;"></col>
<col style="width:33%;"></col>
<col style="width:34%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="theadleft">&#x00A0;</td>
<td class="theadleft">&#x00A0;</td>
<td class="theadleft"><strong>Level of Postoperative Risk</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Severity of OSA</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Mild</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Moderate</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Severe</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Low</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Medium</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">High</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Type of surgery/anesthetic</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Surgery done purely under local anesthetic</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Low-risk surgery under sedation or general anesthesia</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Major surgery/airway surgery under general anesthesia</p></td>
<td class="td3"><p class="tbodyleft">Low</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Medium</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">High</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Pain medication requirements</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">No opioids required</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Low-dose/low-frequency opioids</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">High-dose opioids/neuraxial opioids</p></td>
<td class="td2"><p class="tbodyleft">Low</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Medium</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">High</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tfoot">OSA, obstructive sleep apnea.</p>
<p class="u_tfoot">Adapted from American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Perioperative Management of Patients With Obstructive Sleep Apnea. Practice Guidelines for the perioperative management of patients with obstructive sleep apnea: an updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Perioperative Management of patients with obstructive sleep apnea. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2014;120(2):268-286.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">Common causes of hypoventilation include sedation from anesthetics and opioids, weakness caused by residual NMB, and splinting from inadequately treated pain. Hypercapnia with respiratory acidosis may lead to either increased agitation or somnolence and should be suspected in both of these scenarios. Patients with a history of asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are prone to exacerbations in the postoperative period which may manifest as respiratory distress with expiratory wheezing. If left untreated, this may progress to significantly impaired air movement with subsequent hypercarbia and hypoxia.</p>
<p class="indent">Reversing sedation, improving pain control, bronchodilator therapy, and bilevel positive airway pressure can all be considered for treatment of postoperative hypoventilation depending on the suspected etiology.<sup><a href="ch040-sec16.xhtml#bib7">7</a></sup> Refractory hypoventilation resulting in hypoxia may necessitate reintubation and ICU transfer.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>