<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec267">I. Risks and Complications</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen724">A. Mortality and Major Morbidity Related to Anesthesia</h5>
<p class="nonindent">With the advent of specialty training and certification, advances in pharmacology and technology, and improved perioperative medical care, the mortality risk attributed to anesthesia has declined from about 1/1000 anesthesia procedures in the 1940s to 1 in 100,000 in the early 2000s. A study in 2009 reported a rate of anesthesia-related mortality to be 8.2/million hospital surgical discharges.<sup><a href="ch041-sec04.xhtml#bib1">1</a></sup> The reliability of these statistics, especially as they relate to causation, is undermined by the lack of a centralized data repository, the indirect sources of the data (eg, incident reports and diagnostic codes), the multifactorial and interdisciplinary management of such cases, and the postoperative time period. All available data show that anesthesia-related mortality is directly related to the patient&#x2019;s age (higher at both extremes of age) and their preoperative physical status.</p>
<p class="indent">Quantification of the risk of morbidity related to anesthesia is also difficult to quantify because these data are also subject to limitations in reporting and disclosure. Haller et al estimate that more than 1/10 patients will have an intraoperative incident and 1/1000 will suffer an actual injury such as dental damage, an inadvertent dural perforation, peripheral nerve injury, or significant pain.<sup><a href="ch041-sec04.xhtml#bib2">2</a></sup> Some morbidity such as venous thromboembolism, myocardial infarction, intraoperative fires and burns, or catheter-related bloodstream infections can be predicted and managed; some morbidity such as aspiration, previously<a id="page855"></a> unknown allergies, nerve injuries, or awareness might be mitigated; however, some morbidity such as stroke can neither be well predicted or mitigated.</p>
<p class="indent">In addition, data continue to show a large variation between the practice patterns of anesthesia providers and the surgical team which may be as important to outcome as perioperative risk scores.<sup><a href="ch041-sec04.xhtml#bib3">3</a></sup> Advances in technology and medical science do not readily translate into their ubiquitous adoption into practice.<sup><a href="ch041-sec04.xhtml#bib4">4</a></sup> Potential impediments to the adoption of new technology and even &#x201C;best practices&#x201D; include ongoing controversies regarding outcome benefits, costs associated with training and technology acquisition, perceived lack of &#x201C;need,&#x201D; and culture. Indeed, Cheng et al argue that &#x201C;we need to respect that we cannot (and should not) &#x2018;do it all,&#x2019; especially if the new techniques or technologies will achieve only marginal benefits at best and at greater risk and cost compared with the existing status quo.&#x201D;<sup><a href="ch041-sec04.xhtml#bib5">5</a></sup> Not all presumably &#x201C;new and improved&#x201D; interventions are supported by solid scientific evidence. In a strict legal sense, variations in practice are reasonable if they represent sound medical judgment and conform to the standard of care.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>