<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/jquery.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="js/video-insert.js"></script>
<!--<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-1.10.2.min.js'></script>-->
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery-migrate-1.2.1.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/jquery.qtip.min.js'></script>
<script type='text/javascript' src='js/etext.js'></script>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="sec266">XVI. Incidental Trauma</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen720">A. Corneal Abrasion</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Corneal abrasion is commonly caused by drying or inadvertent eye contact and can occur intraoperatively, on emergence, during transport, or in the PACU. Abrasion causes tearing, decreased visual acuity, pain, and photophobia, but usually heals without scarring within 72 hours. Topical antibiotics should be applied until symptoms resolve. It is important to be alert for visual impairment in patients who have prolonged surgical procedures in the prone position as they have a one in a thousand chance of developing vision loss in the postoperative period. This is most commonly due to ischemic optic neuropathy, and while the etiology of this condition is unclear, anemia, hypotension, and venous congestion are thought to play the major roles in its development.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen721">B. Oral Trauma</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Oral trauma can be caused by laryngoscopy, surgical instrumentation, rigid airways, or inadvertent biting. Lip, tongue, or gum abrasions may be treated with icing and topical analgesia as necessary; however, penetrating soft tissue injury may require antibiotics. If dentition is damaged by airway manipulation or jaw clenching, a dental consult should be obtained and foreign body aspiration should be ruled out. Sore throat, dryness, and hoarseness occur in up to 50% of patients after laryngoscopy and can be managed with humidification of oxygen administration while in PACU and topical analgesia if needed. Intubation can also cause temporomandibular joint dysfunction, hypoglossal, lingual or recurrent laryngeal nerve damage, vocal cord evulsion, or tracheoesophageal perforation.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen722">C. Postdural Puncture Headache</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Postdural puncture headache can occur after subarachnoid anesthesia, dural puncture during epidural placement, intraoperative dural puncture, or following any procedure involving loss of cerebrospinal fluid. The headache can be debilitating and should be treated with aggressive hydration, analgesia, and caffeine. If the symptoms are particularly severe or persistent, an epidural blood patch can be considered.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="sen723">D. Soft Tissue Injury</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Muscle pain, aching, or stiffness may reflect lack of motion or muscle stretch associated with positioning during surgery, particularly if the procedure is prolonged. Excessive joint extension can lead to backache, joint pain, and even joint instability. Soft tissue ischemia and necrosis can occur at pressure<a id="page849"></a> points, especially during surgery in the lateral or prone position, with long duration of surgery, or in patients with a high body mass index (BMI). It is notable that a significant proportion of patients following bariatric surgery (26.5% reported in one study) experience raised serum creatinine kinase to the levels associated with rhabdomyolysis.<sup><a href="#bib12">12</a></sup> Entrapment of ears, genitalia, and skin folds can cause also cause necrosis whereas prolonged scalp pressure may cause localized alopecia. Extravasation of intravenous medications can result in local irritation, neuropathy or compartment syndrome. Thermal, electrical, or chemical burns from cautery equipment and surgical prep solutions may also occur. In the event of significant tissue injury or a suspected compartment syndrome, urgent surgical consultation is indicated.</p>
<p class="BIBLIOGRAPHYpTitle">References</p>
<ol class="ref"><li id="bib1">Apfelbaum JL, Silverstein JH, Chung FF, et al. Practice guidelines for postanesthetic care: an updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Postanesthetic Care. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2013;118(2):291-307. doi:10.1097/ALN.0b013e31827773e9. PMID: 23364567.</li>
<li id="bib2">American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Acute Pain Management. Practice guidelines for acute pain management in the perioperative setting: an updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Acute Pain Management. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2012;116(2):248-273. doi:10.1097/ALN.0b013e31823c1030. PMID: 22227789.</li>
<li id="bib3">Ljungqvist O, Scott M, Fearon KC. Enhanced recovery after surgery: a review. <em>JAMA Surg</em>. 2017;152(3):292-298. doi:10.1001/jamasurg.2016.4952. PMID: 28097305.</li>
<li id="bib4">Gustafsson UO, Scott MJ, Hubner M, et al. Guidelines for perioperative care in elective colorectal surgery. Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) society recommendations: 2018. <em>World J Surg</em>. 2019;43(3):659-695. doi:10.1007/s00268-018-4844-y. PMID: 30426190.</li>
<li id="bib5">Murphy GS, Kopman AF. &#x201C;To reverse or not to reverse?&#x201D;: the answer is clear! <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2016;125(4):611-614. doi:10.1097/ALN.0000000000001280</li>
<li id="bib6">Bulka CM, Terekhov MA, Martin BJ, Dmochowski RR, Hayes RM, Ehrenfeld JM. Nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents, reversal, and risk of postoperative pneumonia. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2016;125(4):647-655. doi:10.1097/ALN.0000000000001279. PMID: 27496656.</li>
<li id="bib7">Keenan SP, Sinuff T, Burns KE, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the use of noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation and noninvasive continuous positive airway pressure in the acute care setting. <em>Can Med Assoc J</em>. 2011;183(3):E195-E214. doi:10.1503/cmaj.100071. PMID: 21324867.</li>
<li id="bib8">American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Perioperative Management of Patients With Obstructive Sleep Apnea. Practice guidelines for the perioperative management of patients with obstructive sleep apnea: an updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Perioperative Management of patients with obstructive sleep apnea. <em>Anesthesiology</em>. 2014;120(2):268-286. doi:10.1097/ALN.0000000000000053. PMID: 24346178.</li>
<li id="bib9">Mahmood F, Matyal R, Skubas N, et al. Perioperative ultrasound training in anesthesiology: a call to action. <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2016;122(6):1794-1804. doi:10.1213/ANE.0000000000001134. PMID: 27195630.</li>
<li id="bib10">Zimmerman JM, Coker BJ. The nuts and bolts of performing focused cardiovascular ultrasound (FoCUS). <em>Anesth Analg</em>. 2017;124(3):753-760. doi:10.1213/ANE.0000000000001861. PMID: 28207445.</li>
<li id="bib11">Zhu AC, Agarwala A, Bao X. Perioperative fluid management in the Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) pathway. <em>Clin Colon Rectal Surg</em>. 2019;32:114-120. doi:10.1055/s-0038-1676476. PMID: 30833860.</li>
<li id="bib12">Khurana RN, Baudendistel TE, Morgan EF, Rabkin RA, Elkin RB, Aalami OO. Postoperative rhabdomyolysis following laparoscopic gastric bypass in the morbidly obese. <em>Arch Surg</em>. 2004;139(1):73-76. doi:10.1001/archsurg.139.1.73. PMID: 14718280.</li></ol>
<a id="page850"></a><a id="page851"></a><a id="page852"></a><a id="page853"></a>
<div class="link-me" id="grp40_1" onclick="openLinkInNewTab('https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_caf/40_Postop_Recovery/story.html');">Infographic 40.1 A Closer Look at OSA and Postoperative Recovery <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
<div class="link-me" id="grp40_2" onclick="openLinkInNewTab('https://download.lww.com/slnsites/sharar_video_lectures/40_Complications_Risk_Management_Patient_Safety_Liability/index.html');">Interactive Video Lecture 40. Complications, Risk Management, Patient Safety, and Liability <span class="small">(Click here to play)</span></div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>