<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals, 2e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<section epub:type="chapter" title="Preface">
<div id="main_container">
<header>
<h3 class="h3_seca"><a id="pagexi"></a><span style="color: #e07e27;">Preface</span></h3>
</header>
<p class="nonindent">Published in 2015, the inaugural first edition of <em>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals</em> was the brainchild of Paul Barash&#x2014;one of the founding editors (along with Bruce Cullen and Robert Stoelting) of the <em>Clinical Anesthesia</em> textbook series that has been in continuous publication since 1989&#x2014;and was intended to be a complementary text to the larger and more comprehensive <em>Clinical Anesthesia</em> compendium (currently in its eighth edition). In contrast to this compendium that targets the seasoned trainee and veteran practitioner, <em>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals</em> was specifically designed to fill the void in anesthesia and perioperative care education exemplified by the early trainee&#x2019;s question &#x201C;Where can I go to most efficiently learn the fundamentals of anesthesia care?&#x201D;. The book&#x2019;s primary goal was to provide a complete, yet succinct introduction to the essential clinical principles and practices for early learners of anesthesia, including medical students, junior anesthesiology residents, anesthesiology assistants, and student registered nurse anesthetists. The book&#x2019;s second goal was to incorporate novel formats that target the cognitive needs and learning tools demanded by &#x201C;digital native&#x201D; learners of the millennial generation, including a manageable print book size, liberal use of graphic and tabular presentations that facilitate trainees to thoughtfully apply their basic science knowledge to the clinical setting, and an extensive, &#x201C;immediately at hand&#x201D; companion eBook with digital teaching tools designed both to appeal to millennial learners and to reinforce content acquisition through complementary methods of content delivery.</p>
<p class="indent">Did the first edition of <em>Clinical Anesthesia Fundamentals</em> achieve its goal? You, the readers, are the final arbiters of that query&#x2014;however, we are encouraged by reader reviews that not only support continued editions, but also offer specific suggestions for improvement. As a result, this second edition relies even more heavily on a fully interactive digital resource, including colorful and meticulously designed infographics in almost every chapter. These infographics serve as visual representations of the book&#x2019;s contents and provide an easy-to-understand overview of a variety of pertinent topics. The information is displayed succinctly and clearly to present learners with an alternative resource to study the material. Additionally, the electronic version of the book includes a collection of interactive questions based on each one of the infographics; all questions provide feedback expanding on the correct answer and explaining all incorrect choices. This learning innovation provides the opportunity to review the infographics and then engage in a challenging question and answer exercise intended for knowledge consolidation. All of the videos have been refreshed and the interactive lectures have been streamlined to facilitate broadcasting them swiftly over the internet.</p>
<p class="indent">As in the first edition, all components of the eBook are viewable through any web browser, and also as a download to one&#x2019;s smartphone or tablet, thus providing immediate and ubiquitous access for the reader. A new chapter on &#x201C;Anesthesia for the Older Patient&#x201D; brings the chapter total to 45. Finally, the<a id="pagexii"></a> book concludes with a series of Appendices, carefully selected for their reference value and clinical relevance to early anesthesia trainees, including essential physiologic formulas/definitions, an electrocardiography atlas, pacemaker/defibrillator protocols, and key standards/algorithms from the American Society of Anesthesiologists, American Heart Association, and Anesthesia Patient Safety Foundation.</p>
<p class="indent">In a reflective and somber note, we are saddened to share that since publication of the first edition, two of our long-time editorial colleagues have passed away&#x2014;Michael K. Cahalan in 2019 and Paul G. Barash in 2020. Both men were highly committed and tireless contributors to the <em>Clinical Anesthesia</em> series&#x2014;Paul since its first edition in 1989 and Mike since its fifth edition in 2009&#x2014;and are universally recognized in our field as consummate clinicians, dedicated educators, and invaluable mentors to both trainees and peers. Moreover, they were role models of professionalism and interpersonal relationships whose teachings, spirits, and senses of humor are legendary and will live on in each of us. We mourn their loss and keep them and their families in our hearts.</p>
<p class="indent">We wish to express our appreciation to both our new and returning contributors who not only provided fundamental content in a novel, yet highly concise format, but did so despite the unexpected and concurrent personal and professional demands of the COVID pandemic. Finally, we owe a debt of gratitude to Ashley Fischer, Senior Development Editor at Wolters Kluwer, whose day-to-day management of this endeavor resulted in a publication that exceeded the Editors&#x2019; expectations.</p>
<p class="right1"><strong><em>Bruce F. Cullen, MD</em></strong></p>
<p class="right"><strong><em>M. Christine Stock, MD, FCCM, FCCP</em></strong></p>
<p class="right"><strong><em>Rafael Ortega, MD</em></strong></p>
<p class="right"><strong><em>Sam R. Sharar, MD</em></strong></p>
<p class="right"><strong><em>Natalie F. Holt, MD, MPH</em></strong></p>
<p class="right"><strong><em>Christopher W. Connor, MD, PhD</em></strong></p>
<p class="right"><strong><em>Naveen Nathan, MD</em></strong></p>
</div>
</section>
</body>
</html>